By Anthony Fenech
Detroit Free Press

 

It came to the surface nearly a year later, following the second of three bench-clearing brawls with the Yankees on Thursday afternoon as the Tigers’ frustration finally festered to the point of in-fighting.

The Tigers’ private discontent with Victor Martinez is now public.

In the bottom of the seventh inning, television cameras caught Martinez in an animated-enough exchange with right-hander Justin Verlander before advancing towards him and being held back by third baseman Nick Castellanos.

The exchange pitted a pair of veteran players who are thought of as team leaders. It also illuminated the reality that for the past two seasons, it has become clear within the Tigers clubhouse that Martinez, the 38-year-old designated hitter, is far from a leader. In fact, the picture painted by people within the organization – from players to coaches to front office figures – is one of an entitled player who isn’t a positive influence and presents a problem for the team going forward.

This season, Martinez’s offensive production has declined in earnest. He is hitting .253 with 10 home runs and 47 RBIs. He is a liability on the basepaths with no position in the field. Next season, he is owed $18 million in the final year of a four-year deal signed prior to the 2014 season.

Martinez’s exchange with Verlander comes nearly a year to the date of his boorish behavior reaching a breaking point in the clubhouse, which came in the aftermath of an Aug. 27 loss to the Angels last season. In that game, four Tigers were ejected, including Martinez.

According to multiple persons with knowledge of the situation who requested anonymity because of they are not authorized to speak publicly on clubhouse matters, when the team entered the clubhouse after that game, Martinez was nowhere to be seen: He had left Comerica Park early.

Asked if an ejected player leaving the stadium was commonplace, one teammate said, “I had never seen it before in my life.”

The early departure was a talking point inside the clubhouse. Those words filtered back to Martinez, who singled out a teammate, confronting him in an incident that never escalated to a physical level, though the players were separated.

Such episodes are not uncommon in clubhouses around baseball: They are the natural byproduct of competitive, testosterone-filled men with enormous egos spending eight months together. Even on winning teams, problems arise.

Though the incident did not seem to have an immediate effect on the team’s play – the Tigers went 17-15 the rest of the way, falling 2 ½ games short of the second American League Wild-Card spot – it is considered the point in which a silenced Martinez started to detach himself from any sort of leadership role and the team concept itself.

It is also said to be the precursor to former hitting coach Wally Joyner leaving after the season. Like the vast majority of the clubhouse, Joyner was supportive of the teammate’s thoughts on Martinez leaving early. His involvement, however, was not welcome by manager Brad Ausmus. Joyner left the team to pursue other baseball opportunities after the season ended.

Martinez has been the single-most difficult player for Ausmus to manage and the central figure in the Tigers’ clubhouse concerns: Though he is a non-factor on the field – performing below replacement-level standards – the ever-prideful Martinez still clings to his stature of yesteryear. He resisted being moved out of the clean-up spot earlier in the season and has reluctantly hit lower in the lineup since returning from the 10-day disabled list with an irregular heartbeat in late June.

“It’s all about him,” one teammate said.

Asked to describe Martinez’s contribution to the clubhouse, another said, “Non-existent.” During times the clubhouse is open to the media, he is rarely seen interacting with players other than a select few and is often spotted playing video games in solidarity, refining his FIFA soccer skills in practice mode on Xbox 360.

Though neither Martinez nor Verlander have spoken about Thursday’s exchange, observers believe it was initiated because Martinez played peacemaker during the on-field fracas in the seventh inning with Yankees catcher Gary Sanchez – who threw punches at both Castellanos and first baseman Miguel Cabrera in the sixth inning – and righty reliever Dellin Betances – who had just hit catcher James McCann in the head with a fastball.

About the exchange, Castellanos told the Free Press, “We handled it. It’s an in-house matter and it’s been handled.”

But what hasn’t been handled is the big problem that Martinez has become.

It’s a problem Ausmus has not solved and one the front office cannot solve by simply releasing him and eating the remaining money on his contract, which amounts to roughly $21 million.

Martinez has spoken in the past about his retirement plans. He said in the spring that he would like to finish his contract. He said in June, “When the day comes and I can’t really play well, I don’t think about that. I know when I’m going to play. If I can’t play before that, it’s all in God’s hands, not my hands.”

The day of Martinez not playing well has come. That, in itself, was inevitable. The Tigers knew as much when former owner Mike Ilitch made Martinez’s re-signing a priority, even if it meant committing big money years after the team projected he would remain productive.

But the solution to the problem is in Martinez’s hands.

He can choose to continue on the path he’s traveled for the past year, unable to come to grips with his declining skills and unwilling to take a reduced role, represented these days in the Tigers’ clubhouse only as an ion of bad energy.

Or he can forge a new path, realistic of his ability, reverting to his team-first form of the past and serve as a sounding board for the young players that make up a substantial part of the clubhouse.

But a tiger cannot change its stripes. And if Martinez, the eldest Tiger, decides he can’t, either, then perhaps he should think about Ilitch, the man who made him so handsomely rich into his late 30’s, not only for his production but also his presence.

“He’s a special guy,” Ilitch said at the time of his re-signing. “His teammates think the world of him, so he’s a special person, I’d say.”

And if Victor Martinez decides he can’t be that person any longer, then maybe he should do the honorable thing and hand over next season’s salary, getting a head start on his central Florida cattle ranch, far from the Tigers clubhouse where he is much more of a problem than a positive these days.

 

Contact Anthony Fenech: afenech@freepress.com. Follow him on Twitter @anthonyfenech.