---
HEADLINE: Fenech: Tigers owner: Money no object; actions say different
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2015-12-05
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2015/12/05/detroit-tigers-mike-ilitch/76846874/
---

Mike Ilitch cares not about money, not about the latest lucrative contract he awarded and not, he said Monday, about baseball's luxury tax limit.

"I think I've proven that," the Tigers' longtime owner said, speaking with reporters for the first time in a long time. "I've been in baseball for a lot of years, and I didn't care about spending money, so they get the players and I spend and I don't worry about it."

And this winter has proved no different than winters past, when names like Victor Martinez and Anibal Sanchez and Prince Fielder came aboard for a lot of money over a lot of years. Early last week, the Tigers introduced right-handed starting pitcher Jordan Zimmermann, signed for five years and $110 million. Sometime soon, they will announce the signing of righty starter Mike Pelfrey for two years and $16 million.

And standing a baker's dozen of millions away from last year's payroll — the team has roughly $160 million accounted for, including the impending raises of arbitration-eligible players — the Tigers' shopping spree might not be over, not with a bullpen yet to be built.

"I'm telling them you gotta get out there and get me the best players, and I don't care about the money," Ilitch said. "I want the best players, and that's it."

The words speak for themselves, but the actions the organization took over the past year tell a different story.

Twice, the Tigers had opportunities to sign the best players. First, it was righty Max Scherzer, who irked Ilitch by upping his asking price on a contract extension two springs ago.

"We made him an offer, and it looked like he was going to take it, and then, all of a sudden, he wanted a little bit more," Ilitch said. "It was a great number, you know, so it irked me a little bit. I figured, 'How much do you want?' I just asked what you wanted, you tell me, and then he tells me and then he wants more."

The extension offer was reportedly for six years and $144 million. After another stellar season in Detroit, Scherzer signed with the Nationals the following winter for seven years and $210 million.

Ilitch has forgotten about it, he said, water under the bridge, but with left-handed ace David Price dominating the headlines this week — signed by former head honcho Dave Dombrowski with the Red Sox — it's hard to forget the second ace pitcher that has slipped out of town recently.

Price's free agency finished with a seven-year, $217-million deal, the biggest for a starting pitcher in baseball history, the latest great option passed over for a good option in Zimmermann.

When the Tigers traded Price to the Blue Jays at the deadline, they hadn't advanced far in contract extension talks, Dombrowski said at the time, saying they weren't in the same ballpark.

Instead of top-tier pitchers in Scherzer and Price, they now have a second-tier option in Zimmermann.

And although his words this week lead you to believe the Tigers are still playing in the ballpark of big money — they likely will exceed last year's $173-million payroll and perhaps push the $189-million luxury tax limit, more than generous enough — their actions over the past year show they have settled for the next-best players, instead of spending on the best.
