---
HEADLINE: 'Great run' may be over for Alex Avila in Detroit
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2015-10-01
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2015/10/01/detroit-tigers-alex-avila/73186738/
---

He knew the lay of the land, having lingered around Comerica Park since his early high school years, and when Alex Avila arrived at his locker inside the Tigers' clubhouse as a rookie six years ago, longtime clubhouse manager Jim Schmakel didn't have to tell him whose number it was.

Hanging inside was the home uniform he longed to wear. On the front, the historic emblem of his favorite team. On the back, his last name — a name long respected in the baseball community — and a number.

Which number a player wears depends on when he comes into the ballpark and what's available, Schmakel said recently, but in the case of the kid he watched grow up — the quiet, unassuming son of the assistant general manager — it was dependent on the player.

"He had been around a long time," Schmakel said of Avila. "I wanted to take care of him."

There are good numbers and bad numbers, he said, and that number — the one catcher Lance Parrish wore for a decade as a six-time All-Star in Detroit — is a good number.

And it is Alex Avila's number.

After seven seasons, Alex Avila's days wearing the Old English D might be numbered, down to this year's last three games in Chicago against the White Sox.

His time putting on that home white uniform already might have expired; last Sunday, he started in the Tigers' final home game.

These days, the starting catcher job he held for the previous five seasons belongs to rookie James McCann. Avila is hitting .194, an average that has dropped four straight seasons and is the lowest of his career. This off-season, Avila, 28, will become a free agent.

And as the most difficult year of his baseball career winds down, the kid who took a crash course in team history by roaming the Comerica Park concourse realizes he's quickly coming to a crossroads with the only organization he has known.

"It's something I've thought about," Avila said, sitting in the dugout on a sunny late September morning. "That day when I'm not going to put on a Tigers uniform to play baseball, it will be a little different for me, a little strange, and it can be a little emotional."

The emotions are tied tightly on and off the field, where his dad, Al, is feeling his way through his first season as general manager.

They agree it has been an awesome ride with the Tigers.

After years of missing Little League, high school and college games while working his way up the major league ranks, Al Avila has been able to watch his oldest son play every day.

"It's been a blessing," he said. "It really has."

It seems like yesterday, he said, that they were talking during his first instructional league as a professional, wondering about the what-ifs of their working relationship.

"I was like, 'It's pretty cool,' " Alex said. " 'One day I could be the catcher in Detroit and you're working here and we're both trying to win the World Series,' and for the last six years, that's how it's been."

"And now that there's a chance it may not happen anymore. I'm kind of bummed out about it."

Nothing lasts forever, Avila knows, not in baseball, a business he is as well-versed as any in, growing up in a family that lives and breathes the game.

His grandfather Ralph Avila was a longtime scout with the Dodgers. His godfather Tommy Lasorda was a legendary manager with the Dodgers.

And time is ticking on the Avila family affair to come full circle with a business decision, one with odds that seem slanted toward a split.

"But at the same time," Alex said, "the run that we've kind of been able to put together the last few years and the relationships that I have here has been amazing. A lot of people go entire careers without being able to experience what I've been able to experience, so I'm very grateful for that."

And he also is grateful for David Chadd.

The story has been told over and over, Avila said, and he heard it firsthand from his dad.

"I don't want them to draft you," Al Avila told his son before the 2008 draft.

Al Avila knew Chadd, the Tigers' former scouting director and current assistant general manager, liked him. He watched him throughout his college career, and as the names went off the board that June afternoon, and as the Alabama catcher's name stuck on it, Al Avila offered his input.

The organization was thin on catching prospects. Chadd thought he could rise fast.

"No," Al Avila said. "Let him go."

He was looking out for his son. He wanted him to get a fair shake and didn't want to burden him with the uncertainties of being the assistant general manager's son.

"You should really let him take him," one front office member chimed in.

At least eight other teams were interested in Alex Avila, and catchers with everyday upside don't last long, so shortly before the 21st pick of the fifth round, Chadd let his voice be heard in the team's draft room at Comerica Park.

"That's the best guy on the board," he said. "If I don't take him, I'm doing a disservice to the Detroit Tigers organization."

It was an exciting moment, Al Avila said, one with mixed emotions.

"I was very excited," Alex Avila said. "But I was a little shocked. I did not think I was going to be a Tiger."

It's a laundry list of moments Avila rattles off as the most memorable of his time as a team mainstay.

"We won a lot of baseball games," he said.

There was Justin Verlander's second career no-hitter in 2011, Verlander's near no-hitters in the seasons that followed and Armando Galarraga's near-perfect game in 2010.

Alex started for the American League in the 2011 All-Star Game — "That was amazing," he said — and won a Silver Slugger Award that season by hitting .295 with 19 home runs and 82 RBIs.

He had the best seat in the house for two Cy Young Award-winning seasons, caught a Most Valuable Player and a guy who won an ERA title.

"It's been a dream come true for me," he said. "When I was a kid, I always wanted to play Major League Baseball, but I never thought it would get to where it is now."

As long as he can remember, he just wanted to play baseball and be good at it.

"You don't ever think, 'I want to catch Cy Young winners,' or 'I want to go to the World Series,' or 'Get to the playoffs every single year,' " he said. "It's been amazing ... the fact that I've been the starter for a team that's been around for over 100 years with such great catchers before me and such a big presence in the baseball community."

He was the field captain for arguably the best four-year run in franchise history, growing from newcomer to team leader in a few short years during the Tigers' run as AL Central champions in 2011-14.

"There's been a few game-winning hits and home runs," he said, but they were just talking about this in the clubhouse the other day, and what stands out most is the champagne.

"I've gotten to spray champagne eight times in the past six years. A lot of guys maybe get one, if not any."

It was a great run, but times have changed, and Avila now is a backup catcher.

He has been a backup since suffering a left knee injury in early May that kept him out for the better part of two months, but likely would be backing up regardless of health because of the way McCann has played.

"Look at what I've done," Avila said. "Mac's played better. Why wouldn't he play? That's the way it is, and that's the way this game works, and there's nothing wrong with that."

And in following the baseball tradition of paying it forward, manager Brad Ausmus said he has seen the relationship between the veteran and rookie blossom.

One day, Avila is working on McCann on calling pitches. The next, receiving pitches. Another, positioning. Plate coverage. Picking balls out of the dirt.

Avila was once in McCann's shoes. In 2009, he was the up-and-comer unseating the incumbent when Gerald Laird showed him the ropes for the final two months of the season.

"Anybody who knows who I am," he said, "knows I'm not the one that's going to handle it in a negative way. I'll do whatever I can to help him, because in my mind, that's the right thing to do."

The situations are different. Avila still has some years left. He can still play a little catcher and that's what has colored Ausmus impressed.

"He's shown me that he's very unselfish, because he's not at an age where he's done playing," Al Avila said. "Yet he's still willing to help a younger catcher who he sees as having a bright future but at the expense of his own playing time."

If Alex Avila returns to the Tigers in 2016, it will be as a backup.

That much has been written in Ausmus' lineup cards for most of the season.

And while the writing on the wall says the Avila party of two will be whittled down to one this off-season, the words from Avila offer an open door.

"I would love to stay here," he said. "I love being with the Tigers. It's my home here."

He will hit the free-agent market with a career batting average of about .240 and a lengthy injury history that includes concussions and a knee that he said feels great these days.

He had a career-worst season this year — "It's not the way myself or anybody else drew it up in spring training," he said — but he swings left-handed, can take a walk, play first base in a pinch and is a good teammate. He also is solid defensively and known for calling a good game behind the plate.

It's not about the money, Avila said. He has made nearly $14 million in his career including $5.4 million this season, according to Baseball-Reference.com.

"The priority is you want to be comfortable and happy where you're at," he said.

He's comfortable in Detroit. He's happy here. But whether the Tigers will come knocking on his door with a return offer remains to be seen.

They have a potential backup in Bryan Holaday, who will make the major league minimum next season — $507,500 — if he is on the active roster for the duration of the regular season. And even though Ausmus said this week he doesn't know if there's a better answer in the organization than Avila, the team could decide on the cheaper option.

Veteran backup catchers generally get around $1 million on the open market.

And whether another team will offer more playing time — perhaps a platoon role — or bet that he can bounce back into a starting role are all factors in his first free-agent decision.

Presented with the hypothetical possibility of skipping the process and re-signing with the Tigers, he said, "I would probably be leaning towards staying.

"If the Tigers figure that I'm someone that would fit on their team going forward, then OK," he said. "If they don't, that's fine. It's just part of the business of baseball."

It's bittersweet, he said, but exciting, too.

"A part of me is kind of excited for that and the unknown a little bit and a new opportunity," he said. "But at the same time, kind of a little bummed out that there's a chance I might not be back at the end of this year."

Avila arrived in Detroit before his sophomore year of high school, following Al Avila from the Florida Marlins, and soon followed former Tigers like Brandon Inge and Dmitri Young around Comerica Park.

He'd throw long toss in leftfield, take soft toss from his dad in the batting cages and bounce around the clubhouse, brushing shoulders with the big leaguers.

He first learned about the franchise's rich history from the historical markers throughout the main concourse, then through legends like Al Kaline and Willie Horton, and when he would watch the terrible Tigers of the early 2000s on television, it always would be on mute with Ernie Harwell on the radio in the background.

"When we moved here, my dad went from working with the Marlins, a team that had zero history, to the Tigers, a team that had 100 years of history," said Avila, who has asked Ausmus to catch Verlander's final start of the season Saturday. "That was pretty cool."

And just before Avila began to etch his name into that history, there he stood, in front of his locker on his first day in the big leagues, staring at Parrish's No. 13 — his No. 13 — when Schmakel came by.

"You know who wore that number?" he asked.

"Yeah," Avila said. "I'm well aware of it."

Alex Avila, an All-Star in 2011, is hitting a career-low .194. To reach .200, he needs at least two hits in his next five at-bats or three in his next 10. His career stats:
