---
HEADLINE: Tigers' Chamberlain returns for 'unfinished business'
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2015-02-24
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2015/02/24/detroit-tigers-joba-chamberlain/23925071/
---

LAKELAND, Fla. -- Joba Chamberlain walked by a couple of people today in TigerTown and "they didn't recognize who I was," he said.

And how could they, what with the stubble on his face and not the bushy beard that used to be in its place.

The right-handed reliever arrived at the Detroit Tigers' spring training facilities this morning as a free agent. He had other major-league offers in hand, more lucrative offers but, over the weekend, Chamberlain decided to take the team up on their offer to stay in Detroit.

"I loved playing there every day," Chamberlain said. "I left it all on the field and for me, I didn't feel like I finished the season the way I wanted to, and we have unfinished business, and I personally do."

The Tigers signed Chamberlain to a one-year, major-league deal. The contract is worth $1 million, according to Fox Sports' Ken Rosenthal.

"We're very happy to have Joba back on board," president and general manager Dave Dombrowski said. "We always liked the job that Joba did for us last year. We're very happy to have him back."

In 2014, his first season outside the Yankees' organization, Chamberlain posted a 3.57 ERA with 59 strikeouts in 63 innings. He started off strong, with a 2.63 ERA in the first half, but slipped in the second half, with a 4.97 ERA.

"I started off well and just at the end, I didn't finish the way I wanted to," he said.

And although he was battling personal problems in the second half, "We all have personal issues," he said, "But at the end of the day, it doesn't change the fact that I've gotta do my job and I didn't do my job at times in the second half."

Chamberlain will be used as a middle-innings reliever, manager Brad Ausmus said, and could find his way into the back-end of games.

"I still think he's got the ability to pitch later in games," Ausmus said.

The second-year manager called Chamberlain "our most consistent pitcher from wire-to-wire" last season, and said his signing only further adds to the big-leauge bullpen depth the Tigers have accumulated this off-season.

"I think it is a lot deeper," Dombrowski said. "I don't think there's any question."

Chamberlain joins closer Joe Nathan, set-up man Joakim Soria, late-inning relievers Bruce Rondon and Al Alburquerque and lefty Tom Gorzelanny in the bullpen.

His addition leaves one opening in relief – for a long relief spot that left-hander Kyle Ryan seems to be the front-runner for.

The Tigers kept in touch with Chamberlain's camp throughout the off-season, Dombrowski said, in case his financial demands fell into the team's budget limitations.

"I didn't think it was going to take place," Dombrowski said. "We liked him and thought he did a good job for us, but just couldn't imagine it would get to that point, but it finally got to that point and we said, 'Hey, we're open minded to it.'"

And Chamberlain said his mind never wavered from Detroit, where he felt at home, and comfortable.

"I feel like Detroit's part of my family," he said. "They treat it that way and I've only been with one other team but it felt like I was home, it felt like I was comfortable and it was just the right place for me."

Chamberlain has been throwing this off-season – even a little bit more than he has in the past, he said, to be ready when a suitor surfaced – and said he's "right where I need to be."

And although Chamberlain is back, the beard as Tigers fans know it, won't be.

"We're definitely going to keep it a little bit restrained from what it was last year," he said. "That was a lot of growth. It won't get like that, trust me."
