---
HEADLINE: Fenech: Dombrowski might be Tigers' biggest free agent
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2015-08-03
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2015/08/03/fenech-dombrowski-might-tigers-biggest-free-agent-signing/31090267/
---

BALTIMORE – A few are gone — David Price to Toronto, Yoenis Cespedes to the New York Mets, Joakim Soria to Pittsburgh — and a few are left, namely outfielder Rajai Davis and catcher Alex Avila.

But during the Detroit Tigers' recent "rebooting" at the trade deadline, the organization's most important free agent-to-be is still here and spun the wheel of fortune from those top players into a number of key prospects that fill the upper echelon of the Tigers' minor league system.

And in meetings with reporters last week, president and general manager Dave Dombrowski spoke like a man who has the Tigers in his future plans.

"I think it makes us a much stronger organization going into next year," he said about the team's three recent trades that netted six prospects, including five pitchers.

Besides left-hander Daniel Norris,

"You're not going to stick three of those guys — although they might be capable of doing that — you're not going to put three young guys into your rotation saying you're trying to win a world championship," Dombrowski said.

And, Dombrowski said: "Our starting pitching will be addressed in the wintertime." And, he said: "I assure you that our goal going into next year will be to try to win a world championship."

As it stands, Dombrowski is not under contract for the wintertime. He isn't guaranteed to be captaining the ship toward next year's championship goal.

Whether a contract extension is imminent is unknown. Dombrowski, who signed a four-year extension in August 2011, doesn't comment publicly on his situation.

But what is known is the importance of the 59-year-old executive to the organization and its rebooting. The Tigers have taken the first step by deciding to sell their most prized parts in the name of long-term stability. The next step is to extend Dombrowski.

Perhaps owner Mike Ilitch has tried. Maybe Dombrowski would like to see what the market holds for his services and what other situations arise.

But without him in the fold, free agents wouldn't look at Detroit as the same kind of destination. There would be a lot of luster lost from one of the best franchises in baseball on and off the field.

It's hard to read between the lines with a man as careful with his words as Dombrowski. But in so many of them last week, with the repeated phrases like "our" and "us" and "we," it was easy to see that plans are in place for the future.

Dombrowski did his part to start the rebooting. Now it's Ilitch's turn to reboot his contract so he can execute those future plans.
