---
HEADLINE: Myers: After 32 years, Freep sports editor remembers much
BYLINE: Gene Myers
DATE: 2015-11-15
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/2015/11/15/freep-sports-editor-gene-myers-memories/75814442/
---

The Michigan Panthers. Without a doubt.

I have found myself thinking often the past few weeks about the Panthers — who played in the Silverdome, were led by Anthony Carter, Bobby Hebert and John Corker, and won the inaugural USFL championship in 1983 — and why they are my all-time favorite Michigan sports team.

My 32-year career at the Detroit Free Press, the past 22-plus as your sports editor, ended two weekends ago. And it all started, in so many ways, with the Michigan Panthers.

In July 1983, the Panthers were about to play the Philadelphia Stars in Denver for the USFL title. At the time, the Lions hadn't won a playoff game in 25 seasons, and Detroit was going wild for an upstart pro football team that had won 12 of its last 14 games. Only once were the Silverdome's goalposts ever torn down — when the Panthers beat the Oakland Invaders in the '83 semifinals.

For two months I had been a copy editor in the Sports Department, a 23-year-old rookie out of Kansas. As the staff was finishing a special section previewing the USFL title game, a veteran editor made a rookie mistake: He picked up and moved a couple of legs of type in the composing room. That was such a violation of union rules and protocol that no one was surprised when several irate printers started cursing out the editor and chased him out of the composing room while threatening him with their X-acto knives.

As the youngest and dumbest on duty, I was selected to go to the composing room, try to make peace with the printers and finish the section. I'll never forget my instructions: Don't be intimidated — but don't get hurt.

I must have done OK, because after the Panthers beat the Stars, 24-22, I was picked to lead the section commemorating what Detroiters considered their first championship since the 1968 Tigers. I even stayed up most of the night writing a history of the Panthers.

Not only did Panthersmania jump-start my young Free Press career, it led to a ton of overtime hours that week. I used the extra money to buy a ring — and in August proposed.

Three decades later I am still married. But three decades later I finally have left the Free Press, accepting a generous early retirement offer from Gannett, at age 55.

My hardworking staff — which gave me a touching send-off, plus an incredible Shinola watch — asked me to write a farewell column. I relished the opportunity to thank the Free Press, all folks I have worked with over the decades and, most of all, you the reader. Each day I felt it was my duty to provide you with the best possible coverage in the country's greatest sports city.

Even so, I have struggled to find the right words or any words of wisdom. I could not think of a tidy phrase or paragraph to sum up 30-plus years of a career. So many wonderful memories. So many amazing coworkers. So much great work. So many laughs. … And so many insane times. Championships. No-hitters. Deaths. Retirements. Hall of Fame inductions. NCAA sanctions. Jocks in jail. Firings. Firings. And more firings — and that's just the Lions!

The Lions, in fact, changed coaches 10 times during my 32-year career (Clark-Rogers-Fontes-Ross-Moeller-Mornhinweg-Mariucci-Jauron-Marinelli-Schwartz-Caldwell). The Tigers and Red Wings each did it seven times, the Pistons a whopping 15 times.

I hesitate to mention names in a farewell column because I do not want to leave out anyone. But I would be remiss not to include four.

First, there's Joe Distelheim, who as sports editor hired me halfway through my redshirt senior year at KU. There's Dave Robinson, who in his first month as Distelheim's successor promoted me to assistant sports editor in August 1985, as a punk 25-year-old, and helped pick me to be sports editor in February 1993, as a punk 32-year-old. There's Laurie Delves, who as secretary added order to chaos in the Sports Department and did so much professionally and personally to keep me sane and on track.

And fourth, but certainly not last, there's The Lovely Mrs. Myers, who somehow has put up with me for 311/2 years of marriage. I am truly blessed to have found such a wonderful, loving, understanding and funny partner and best friend. Somehow, she still has loved me even though I wasn't around enough; we'll see what happens when I'm around

OK. One more line of shout-outs. To the incredible folks who have been my deputies over the years: Owen Davis, Tom Panzenhagen, Alison Cotsonika and Kevin Bull. They have been my right-hand men and woman (and oftentimes the left-hand, too).

What will I do in retirement? Well, at 55, I am not going to putter around for the next three or four decades. I do have a lot of passions and energy and ideas; I just don't intend to hold a steady job ever again.

Here's what I won't do: Send another e-mail at 3 a.m. Loosely toss out profanities, long part of the newsroom culture. Worry whether a sporting event will end by deadline.

Here's what I will do: Always read the Detroit Free Press and freep.com. And you should, too. Trust me, there's a great Sports staff — hey, I hired most of 'em! — working 24/7 on a mission to inform and entertain you.

They are proud to call themselves Freepsters. As am I.

In honor of Gene Myers' retirement from the Free Press after 32 years of service, we present 10 of the most iconic Free Press fronts during his tenure:

Gene Myers saw a lot of wins (mostly U-M's and MSU's) and a lot of losses (mostly the Lions) over his 32 years at the Free Press. The eight major Michigan teams' records from when he was hired in late summer 1983, ranked by winning percentage:
