---
HEADLINE: Tigers send Rondon home for 'effort level'
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2015-09-22
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2015/09/22/detroit-tigers-bruce-rondon/72633862/
---

On Monday morning, Detroit Tigers manager Brad Ausmus was asked which player could do the most in the final two weeks of the season to solidify his spot on next year’s team.

On Monday night, the nightcap of a day-night doubleheader against the Chicago White Sox, Rondon threw a scoreless ninth inning. His velocity was noticeably down – of 15 pitches, only one was clocked on the Comerica Park radar gun higher than 94 m.p.h. – and Ausmus said after the game that he was aware of the readings but, “he said he was fine.”

Asked to assess the outing, Ausmus said: “He got three outs.”

And this afternoon, mere hours after that third out – a groundout to first base on his hardest pitch of the outing, at 96 m.p.h. – Rondon’s locker inside the Tigers clubhouse was empty.

“Bruce Rondon, because of his effort level, has been sent home,” Ausmus told reporters at the start of his pregame media session before tonight’s game against the White Sox. “And, other than saying that (general manager) Al Avila and myself completely agreed on it, there will be no other details and comment."

In a text message, Avila reciprocated those thoughts, saying: “We both agreed in the long run that this course of action is best for Bruce and the club.”

Ausmus would not elaborate on whether it was a baseball-related decision. Rondon is not suspended, the Tigers said, and will continue to get paid throughout his absence.

When reached by the Free Press this afternoon, Rondon’s agent, Wilfredo Polidor, said he did not know why the right-handed reliever was sent home.

Rondon, 24, has served as the team’s closer since early August, after Joakim Soria was traded to the Pittsburgh Pirates at the trade deadline and right-hander Alex Wilson was shelved for a short period of time with shoulder soreness.

Rondon opened his two-month audition for next year’s closer role with his second career save – and first since 2013 -- on Aug. 8, then another in his next outing four days later, but has blown four of seven save opportunities since. In 35 appearances this season, Rondon has a 5.81 ERA with a 1.61 WHIP. In 31 innings, he has allowed 31 hits, struck out 36 batters and walked 19.

Asked what it means to lose a big component of the team, catcher Alex Avila said simply, “to be a big component of the team, you have to be here with the team.”

Rondon isn’t any longer, and wasn’t at the outset of the season, when he opened on the 15-day disabled list with right bicipital tendonitis, which shelved him in the final week of spring training.

As he worked his way back to the big leagues, the reports from Triple-A Toledo conveyed the cracks underneath the surface that finally came to a head with his dismissal today.

On June 15, after nine rehabilitation assignments with the Mud Hens – he allowed 10 earned runs on 15 hits in 8 2/3 innings to that point – the Tigers activated him from the disabled list and opted to leave him in the minor leagues.

“There’s nothing in particular with the pitches,” Ausmus said at the time. “It’s just more about being on the mound, competing, throwing strikes and getting outs.”

Said Mud Hens manager Larry Parrish, after a June 5 outing in which he allowed four runs on four hits and three walks: “As bad as his line looked, it was probably worse than that.”

At the time, Ausmus said, he felt Rondon was simply preparing himself for a return to the big leagues without an emphasis on performance.

“Now he’s in a situation where he’s gotta get outs,” Ausmus said on June 15.

Shortly thereafter, he did, and was recalled to the Tigers on June 25, splitting time between high-and-low leverage roles in the bullpen before an opportunity was given to close games, which has long been the Tigers’ long-term plans for Rondon.

And slowly but surely, that opportunity was squandered. Now, his future with the franchise is clouded with doubt. Rondon’s salary this season is $510,000. He is not arbitration-eligible until 2017.

“He has tremendous ability,” Ausmus said Monday morning.

But a day later, that ability looks further away than it ever has before, and that if Rondon is to reach it, more likely than not he will be wearing another uniform.
