---
HEADLINE: Fenech: Ausmus out, so Tigers should look at Gardenhire
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2015-09-11
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2015/09/11/detroit-tigers-brad-ausmus-manager-anthony-fenech/72051382/
---

And if that ride is coming to an end, if the Detroit

And as general manager Al Avila appears poised for his first managerial hire (though he today

Gardenhire, who turns 58 next month, is a familiar face, a former Tigers foe who managed against them for 13 seasons with the Twins until he was let go following last season.

His resume features a record barely about .500 – 1,068-1,039 – but he has won six American League division titles. They came in his first nine years with Twins, capped in 2010 with his selection as AL manager of the year. The Twins, with their low payroll went south after that, finishing no higher than fourth in his final four seasons and averaging 96 losses.

But it's the presence he brings to the most visible position in the organization that puts him in prime position to earn his second managerial stint.

Gardenhire, like Ausmus' predecessor Jim Leyland, is cut from an old-school baseball cloth, one that over his years produced very successful results for the penny-pinching Twins that fought an uphill battle against teams like the Tigers, who wildly outspent them on a yearly basis.

After owner Mike Ilitch stepped outside the box with Ausmus' hiring in 2013, at Dave Dombrowski's suggestion, and after seeing the results – the team is a month away from its second disappointing season in a row, staring at a last-place finish a year after getting swept in the first round of the playoffs – it makes most sense that the team revert back to a manager that has been around the block more than a few times and a manager that has a proven track record of success in the major leagues.

Ausmus had neither, and doesn't fit the profile of a Tigers' headman under Ilitch – the 46-year-old former catcher and Dartmouth graduate, still only five years removed from his playing days, sits starkly in contrast with the backgrounds of Ilitch's previous hires, most with much more tread on the tires.

So if resumes start to stack up on Avila's desk, managing experience easily should be the strongest point for the person who will lead the Tigers' reboot.

Another name of note is Mariners manager Lloyd McClendon, who carries a strong reputation inside the Tigers' clubhouse – he served on Leyland's staff in multiple roles – and will be available if the new Mariners leadership elects to go in a different direction. He was passed over for Ausmus in 2013.

But the best available man at the moment is Gardenhire, who widely was regarded as one of the best managers in baseball before his mutual parting with the Twins, whose young nucleus needed a different voice, which it has received from rookie manager Paul Molitor.

Eight times, Gardenhire's Twins finished above .500. Seven times, Gardenhire finished in the top three in the manager of the year voting.

This spring, he said that he would like to manage again.

"I've got a lot of baseball left in me," he told the Minneapolis Star-Tribune while visiting Twins spring training in Ft. Myers, Fla. "If somebody's looking for a manager and I'm a fit, great. I would love to manage again."

That fit could come with the Tigers.
