---
HEADLINE: Mets' Collins pays tribute to late EMU coach Oestrike
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2015-02-08
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/college/2015/02/08/eastern-michigan-ron-oestrike-new-york-mets-terry-collins/23098205/
---

New York Mets manager Terry Collins remembers his brief days as a builder.

It was 1971, and his Eastern Michigan teammates were tasked with putting the fence together, boarding up the dugouts and other odd jobs during the construction of what is now known as Oestrike Stadium.

"It's part of your life," he said.

And for the first time in 20 years, Collins was back in Ypsilanti on Saturday night to accept the 2015 Distinguished Alumni Award at the EMU baseball lead-off dinner.

"I didn't come here to be honored," Collins said. "I came here to honor Ron Oestrike."

Oestrike, the longtime EMU baseball coach, died July 11 at age 82.

"He was a special guy; anybody who played for him knows that," Collins said. "I came here because of him. I had a lot of places I could have gone to school, but Ron Oestrike was the reason I came to Eastern Michigan."

Collins played shortstop for the Eagles in 1968-71 and was part of their 1971 NAIA national championship team.

He led the team in steals that year and was inducted into the EMU Athletics Hall of Fame in 1994.

He spent the better part of two days with first-year head coach Mark Van Ameyde and said he has kept up with the Eagles throughout the years.

"I get online once a week and see how they're doing," Collins said.

He played with former EMU coach Roger Coryell and recently golfed with former teammates in Florida, including former MLB umpire Rocky Roe.

"We still feel like we're part of the program," he said.

Collins, 65, is entering his fifth season as Mets manager and 10th as a big-league manager. He managed the Astros in 1994-96 and the Angels in 1997-99.

It's a turning-point season of sorts for the Mets, who are looking to take the next step in the National League East.

"In the past, we've asked our fans for patience because we had to make some moves," he said. "We started bringing young players to the big leagues, and it's time."
