---
HEADLINE: Source: Tigers to fire Brad Ausmus at season's end
BYLINE: George Sipple
DATE: 2015-09-11
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2015/09/11/detroit-tigers-brad-ausmus-fired/72048180/
---

CLEVELAND – Brad Ausmus will not be the Detroit Tigers' manager next season, the Free Press has learned.

Owner Mike Ilitch intends to fire Ausmus after this season ends, according to a person with knowledge of the front office's plans. The person asked not to be identified late Thursday because he was not authorized to discuss the situation publicly. The person said that former Tigers president and general manager Dave Dombrowski "fought off ownership so that it didn't happen much earlier."

Detroit's Channel 4 (WDIV-TV) also started reporting late Thursday that Ausmus would be out after the season, which ends Oct. 4 in Chicago against the White Sox.

Tigers general manager Al Avila today

The Tigers are in last place in the American League's Central Division, 64-76 (.457) after

Tigers officials did not respond to messages about Ausmus' status late Thursday. Asked in a text message about his status, Ausmus replied that he had heard about the Channel 4 report and that he did not have a comment.

Ausmus is in his second season at the Tigers' helm – his first managerial experience. He has a 154-148 record, which included a division title last season and a three-game sweep to the Orioles in the playoffs.

He has one year left on his contract, signed Nov. 3, 2013. The club also holds an option for the 2017 season.

Ilitch relieved Dombrowski of his duties Aug. 4 and promoted Al Avila, the assistant GM, to general manager. Avila gave a vote of confidence to Ausmus – at least for the time being. "I believe in Brad Ausmus," Avila said then. "He's our manager for the rest of the season for sure. I have all the confidence in him. I think he's done a good job. … I do have all the confidence in the world in Brad Ausmus and his staff right now."

Since early August, the Tigers have stumbled from the edge of the wild-card race to the second-worst record in the American League. Since Dombrowski's ouster, the Tigers have gone 13-22.

After the latest loss Thursday, Ausmus conducted a normal postgame session with media in Cleveland.

Back in Detroit, however, Channel 4 sports anchor Bernie Smilovitz sent the social media world into a tizzy when he appeared during a break in NBC's Patriots-Steelers broadcast to tease that he would reveal a big Tigers story on the newscast after the game.

Many fans have blamed the Tigers' disappointing season in large part on the manager. The outcry has become louder during the Tigers' latest tailspin – losses in 15 of their last 20 games.

The Tigers took their team photo Tuesday. Ausmus was asked about his chat with Ilitch but refused to reveal any details, saying that was "personal."

After four straight division titles, the Tigers were expected to be serious contenders again this season. But Dombrowksi traded stars David Price, Yoenis Cespedes and Joakim Soria at the July trade deadline after it was decided that the team was too far out of the playoff race. Injuries to Miguel Cabrera and the offensive struggles of Victor Martinez didn't give the Tigers optimism they could earn a wild-card berth.

Instead, the trades helped restock a farm system that had been depleted in recent years by trades that were intended to produce a World Series championship, an elusive goal for Ilitch, who turned 86 in July.

Ausmus was hired as the 37th manager in Tigers history following a two-week search. He replaced the retired Jim Leyland. On the day his hiring was announced, Ausmus said: "I have a pretty good feel for the modern-day player. What the makeup is, what the mind-set is."

Ausmus played two stints for the Tigers during his 18-year big league career. He was traded twice by the Tigers.

After four interviews, Dombrowski said, he was convinced Ausmus was the man for the job.

"I was taken back with how impressive he was," Dombrowski said at the time. "Every time Brad's name came up, it was effusive with praise."

Ausmus was hired with no previous managerial experience, besides managing the Israel national team in the 2010 World Baseball Classic qualifying rounds.

He interviewed for at least three jobs that off-season, including the Tigers, and was said to be atop the list of the Chicago Cubs' potential managerial candidates.
