---
HEADLINE: Healthy and strong, Tigers' Verlander having fun again
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2015-10-04
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2015/10/04/detroit-tigers-justin-verlander/73321440/
---

CHICAGO -- He was scared, Justin Verlander admits, looking back on last season and the times when he sat in the dugout during a long inning and dreaded returning to the mound, knowing what was in store for him when he got there.

The times when he was trying to find himself on the mound, a mid-inning mechanical tweak here or minuscule arm slot change there, trying something, anything, to alleviate the pain in his right shoulder and pitch the way he could.

He looked like he was feeling for things, people said. Lost, others said. Done, skeptics said.

And between the ears of baseball’s pre-eminent power right-hander, it wasn’t fun.

“It just wasn’t,” Verlander said last week, sitting in front of his locker, still sweaty after a bullpen session in the midday Texas heat. “This is a game that’s supposed to be fun.”

And after a year and a half of struggles, after falling off the mountaintop of major league aces, fighting injury after injury, the Tigers’ veteran has climbed back up. He’s healthy again.

“It’s kind of a sigh of relief for not just me, but a lot of people, that I showed I can go out there and pitch like I expect to again,” Verlander said. “Not that I’ve ever lost confidence — it was tough not to — but I maintained it wholeheartedly. If you don’t believe in yourself, who’s going to?”

It took some seeing to believe, but thanks to his second-half surge, the Tigers’ biggest victory in a lost season is the re-emergence of their ace. That will anchor the rotation as they try to return to relevance next season.

After struggling out of the gate — a right triceps strain kept him out for the first two months of the season and sent him into spring training mode for June and most of July — Verlander had a 2.22 ERA in his previous 13 starts

Verlander finished the season with a 3.38 ERA and 1.09 WHIP through 20 starts.

“Now it’s like it used to be,” he said. “Things are coming back to me. I’m feeling a lot like my old self.”

No more than Aug. 26 at Comerica Park, when he came within three outs of his third no-hitter, blanking the Angels with a one-hitter.

But with all of that mileage on his arm — he has pitched more than 2,100 innings in his 11-year career — and with that arm not slinging as spryly as it used to, he has adapted his preparation by using more statistical analysis, as recommended by manager Brad Ausmus and pitching coach Jeff Jones in early July.

An avid poker player, Verlander won’t tip his hand, but said he looks at a wide array of numbers that he never did when he could throw whatever he wanted to whenever he wanted to.

“Just a little bit more in-depth,” he said. “Looking into hitters and scouting reports and just getting more of a blueprint with what I want to do. There are some stats you can look at and just kind of help you through some certain situations, whether it be pitch selection or location or whatever it may be. Obviously you still have to trust your instincts and go with what your gut tells you, but it’s kind of like gambling, where you can select better pitches.”

These days, Jones said, Verlander prepares more thoroughly, knowing what pitches his opponents like to hit in what counts and what locations they prefer.

“He’s always had a good game plan,” Jones said. “But I think this has made it even better.”

But no amount of fact-gathering can make up for the way his 32-year-old body feels.

“Night and day,” he said, when asked how he feels compared to last year. “In all ways.”

It takes at least a year to regain full strength from core muscle surgery he underwent after the 2013 season, former Tiger Torii Hunter told him, and even though he battled through another 200-inning season last year, he did so without his lower half, which put substantial stress on his shoulder.

That soreness forced him out of a start that August in Pittsburgh, amid what he calls the most uncertain time of his career.

“It was something that had been lingering for a long time and wasn’t going away,” Verlander said. “It just got worse and worse, and that was kind of the breaking point.”

He was throwing in the mid-80 m.p.h. range. He lasted only a 40-pitch inning that night. “We were all very scared,” Jones said.

Verlander included. “I really thought something was going to be wrong with my shoulder when I got the MRI,” he said.

But there was only inflammation, built up from start after start of throwing all arm.

And now, after clearing his first major injury hurdle this spring, Verlander has been humbled by the struggles, which have forced him to evolve in order to elevate himself to the level to which he is accustomed.

“It’s difficult struggling,” he said. “Nobody wants to struggle, but inevitably, you look at most guys’ careers and at some point they struggle. But I think it made me a better player. And it makes you enjoy doing well all the more.”

They see it on the mound and in the dugout.

“He’s having a lot more fun,” Jones said. “He’s bouncing around the dugout even between starts, which is a good sign, and on the day that he does start, he’s totally prepared when he goes out there, and it’s shown.”

Verlander isn’t back, the Tigers have said. He never went anywhere. But his health left him, and now it’s back. So, too, is the pitcher he once was, at a time the organization most needs him.

“He’s as close to what he used to be as he’s been in a couple years, I don’t think there’s any question,” Jones said. “It’s been like old days for me to watch him right now, being able to dial it up and get himself out of innings. It’s just really fun to watch him.”

And for the first time in a long time, Justin Verlander is having fun again.
