---
HEADLINE: Tigers pick Price over Verlander for Opening Day
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2015-03-20
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2015/03/20/detroit-tigers-david-price/25078621/
---

LAKELAND, Fla. — David Price heard a couple of things today.

But it was what he heard from his teammate and not what he heard from his manager — that he would be starting Opening Day for the Tigers — that resonated most with the left-hander.

"He just told me congrats," Price said of his conversation with Justin Verlander, "And if he lost it to anybody in baseball, he's happy that it was me."

And then, in typical Verlander fashion, said, "He hopes that I'll be here next year so he can win it back. So I definitely appreciated him saying that to me."

After seven seasons, the Tigers will have a new Opening Day starter April 6 against the Twins at Comerica Park and after much anticipation, manager Brad Ausmus discussed that decision outside of the team's clubhouse this morning.

"It's a tough decision when you have two guys like that," Ausmus said. "It wasn't an easy decision. But looking at it from a baseball perspective, I thought this was the decision."

Price, like many, was surprised with Ausmus' call — surprised, he said, more than one time — so surprised that he had already told his family to fly to Detroit for the second game of the season.

"My whole family's got to change their flights," he said. "I told them, I was like, 'Look, book your flights and do everything for the second game of the season. Verlander, he's going to be throwing that Opening Day.' It caught quite a few people by surprise."

Ausmus said he could have went either way and there was nothing that he didn't take into account in naming Price the team's first starting pitcher of the year.

"Justin Verlander has been an outstanding pitcher for a long time," Ausmus said. "He has done a lot for the Detroit Tigers organization but ultimately, I have to make a decision based on baseball and what's best for the 2015 Tigers."

Price and Verlander will be followed by Anibal Sanchez, Alfredo Simon and Shane Greene in the rotation. The Tigers won't skip any of the five because of an off-day the first week of the season, Ausmus said.

Price, 29, has made three previous Opening Day starts, including the past two with the Rays. He finished sixth in American League Cy Young Award voting in 2014, posting a 3.26 ERA with a major league-leading 271 strikeouts in a major-league leading 2481/3 innings.

"I'm honored and it's definitely a blessing to be out there to throw that Opening Day," Price said. "And for it to be home in Comerica Park, I think that will be pretty special."

Price, who is scheduled to hit free agency as the top arm on the market in the off-season, said the nod won't have an effect on a business decision and, "I don't think that's why they did it, either. I hope not, at least."

Price's first three starts will come against the Twins, Indians and Yankees. He will be followed by Verlander, who passed along the most important message of the day a few minutes before he spoke with the media about his assignment.

"It was probably the best thing I heard all day, to be honest," Price said. "And I heard that I'm starting Opening Day."
