---
HEADLINE: Spending the day with Jim Harbaugh, the main Big Ten attraction
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2016-07-26
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/college/university-michigan/wolverines/2016/07/26/michigan-wolverines-jim-harbaugh-big-ten-media-days/87557758/
---

CHICAGO – It is 11:30 a.m. and the biggest name in college football has been found.

A Michigan assistant just ran into Jim Harbaugh in the restroom.

“So, he should be around here,” the assistant said.

And inside the Hyatt McCormick Place in Chicago, which is spacious and stretches across a street, full with ballrooms and conference rooms and enough room to hide even the most recognizable of people, “around here” could be anywhere.

There is a room with radio stations broadcasting remotely. Harbaugh is not in there.

There is a room that serves Fox Sports as a makeshift studio. Not there.

A man in a black jacket with a gold, block “M” pinned to his lapel walks by. Harbaugh could be somewhere over there, past a Big Ten sign designating a television broadcast area, a rival coach and some players. There, outside a doorway to the Clark ballroom, is another Michigan man with a pin. And another. Harbaugh has to be in there.

“Our goal is to get better every day,” he says, sitting down for an interview with Sirius XM Radio’s College Football Nation. It is not the last time he will say that today. He talks about improving each and every day and will talk about it again in the media workroom later, standing on a stage in front of hundreds of journalists on Twitter and television cameras focused on the fever that is Jim Harbaugh, which has infected the sport since he returned to U-M in January 2015.

He will say it again sitting on a podium after that, with reporters standing four and five people deep, cameras still centered, offering nonanswers to some questions, good answers to others and on at least one occasion, not taking the bait from an Ohio-based reporter trying to troll him for a sound bite.

Harbaugh was the main attraction at the first of two Big Ten football media days Monday. He has been throughout an off-season that saw him jet across the country for satellite camps and star in rap videos, drawing criticism and jealousy — none that he cares about — and leading him back to Chicago, where he was a longtime quarterback for the Bears, the momentum he has created at U-M evident thorughout the day.

The first thing you notice about Harbaugh on this day is his cap.

He is wearing a navy blue U-M cap, with the skinny block “M” that he likes, and he is not wearing khakis. It is late morning and he is doing the first of many interviews with host Taylor Zarzour and former Alabama quarterback Greg McIlroy on satellite radio.

Harbaugh has a bad habit — his family has been trying to get him to quit — and he is spitting it into a mini diet Pepsi bottle. He is going back and forth with the guys, the banter turning to his wardrobe.

“I feel a bit silly,” Harbaugh says about wearing a suit, plaid gray with a midnight blue shirt underneath. He is the only coach in attendance wearing a cap. Later, he explains it’s because he needs a haircut and he likes the skinny block “M.”

“It’s a bit silly that we’re all getting up here wearing suits together,” he says.

Harbaugh talks about the team’s quarterback battle and how he’s too old to jump in and show them how it’s done these days, but insists he hasn’t lost it.

“When I was in my early 40’s, I was more apt to jump in and show them,” he says. “Now, it’s, ‘Is this the visual I want these guys to see? I still got it. Never really lost it, but it’s more of a one-day thing.”

Harbaugh is asked if he could see himself coaching at U-M forever. If he thinks that way.

“Yeah, I think that way,” he says. “God willing.”

It is 12:30 p.m. and Harbaugh is through the first portion of the day’s interrogation. U-M staffers note how much more comfortable he appears this year, his second year, coming off a 10-3 season, than he did the previous year.

After the satellite radio interview, he disappears into the next room for another interview. Then, he participates in a video shoot for Big Ten Network commercials and marketing videos.

The production crew raves about Harbaugh.

“Even him doing nothing is funny,” one says.

“It’s like an onside kick is coming,” another says. “You just wait for the other shoe to drop.”

In some of the shots, he is texting. In others, just deadpanning to the camera.

He walks out and takes his first picture of the day. It is with a U-M junior named Sam Elrad, who is an intern for Big Ten Network. He small-talks with ESPN.com senior writer Gene Wojchiechowski, who moments earlier describes Harbaugh as somebody “with his own strange football DNA that hasn’t been replicated and probably never will.”

Wojchiechowski, who has covered college football since the early 1990’s, likens him to heart paddles put on people to revive them.

“That’s what he did at Michigan,” he says. “He’s one of a kind.”

After lunch, he emerges for the first of two media sessions. First, a quick question-and-answer inside the media workroom. A Big Ten Network videographer walks backward on his walk there. A photographer hustles past the U-M contingence to get a few shots. He signs a football for a young girl and a photograph of him and legendary coach Bo Schembechler for her dad. The further he walks, the more people trail, until he is ushered through a STAFF ONLY door.

After getting introduced, he talks at length about his three players in attendance: Cornerback Jourdan Lewis, tight end Jake Butt and wide receiver Amara Darboh.

The first question he gets is about his social media presence, and the off-season.

“I don’t know how entertaining it has been,” he says, simply. He’s asked about the upcoming Real Madrid soccer game at Michigan Stadium and says he’ll be rooting for whichever team plays the hardest. More questions, about what he has learned in a year, how the team will react to the spotlight, the Big Ten East and how he will utilize his impressive freshman class.

Harbaugh says playing time will be determined in meritocracy fashion and wonders if he has just made up a word. Disappointed in his efforts, he has not. Later, he speaks glowingly of Jabrill Peppers and says “anything’s accomplishable” with Peppers. Now he has. He talks about the rap video with Bay Area rapper Bailey, and says, “I think the cool people liked it.”

On the way to the first-floor podium room, where a number of coaches and players will take the podium for up to an hour, he stops to speak with a U-M alum named Wayne Brandt, who lives in northwest Indiana. Brandt collects U-M yearbooks and gifts the 1943 version to Harbaugh.

Brandt called him a “force of nature,” which Harbaugh dismissed. “But he really is,” Brandt says. He also collects steins, which Harbaugh signed, before strolling into the podium room.

It is around 2:25 p.m. when Harbaugh walks into the room.

There are nearly 40 people around his podium, which is unoccupied. He is live on set on Big Ten Network. There are nine television cameras pointed toward his empty seat, everyone anticipating the main event, which shows up at 2:34 p.m. One television reporter, WXYZ Channel 7’s Justin Rose, boasts that he was the first to the scene, a “veteran move” given the crowd soon to follow.

Harbaugh first explains the cap. Then he starts answering question after question that he has undoubtedly answered before on this day, about his message to the players and the injury report and delving deep into a “submarine” for fall training camp.

“Jim, what resonates with you about being the face of the program?”

“Doesn’t mean anything to me,” he says. “Has no resonation for me.”

“Jim, are you guys on schedule?”

“Yeah, we’ve scheduled practices. I have them all on my computer.”

“Jim, about all the headlines you’re in …”

“I’m not really in the headlines all the time,” he says.

Asked about the rap song again, he says, “It’s a respectable and good song.”

He leaves the podium nearly an hour later, trying to stay on schedule for future commitments, which tonight includes speaking at an event for the late Chad Carr, the grandson of longtime U-M coach Lloyd Carr, who died in November from Diffuse Intrinsic Pontine Glioma, an inoperable brain tumor.

Reporters stop him. When he is finally out of their reach, a man asks for an autograph.

His name is Gerald Blanc. He lives in Chicago. He wants to show Harbaugh a tattoo on his right bicep, of a block “M,” with “GO BLUE” underneath. Harbaugh has never signed someone’s skin before, he says, but with a Sharpie pen, scribbles his name above.

The “A” in Harbaugh is not to his liking.

“I think I can do better than that,” he says.

He tells Blanc to wash it off and come back tomorrow for another try. Minutes later, Blanc is unsure if he can bring himself to wash it off.

“But the fact that Jim Harbaugh is not 100% happy with it, I think I might have to take it off and have him re-do it,” Blanc says.

Harbaugh looks at it again and says, “Yeah, we gotta wash that off. I’m not pleased with that.”

“Nice bicep,” Harbaugh says, and walks away.
