---
HEADLINE: Nick Castellanos was itching to hit well before deplaning Tuesday
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2016-09-28
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2016/09/28/detroit-tigers-nick-castellanos/91207446/
---

Nick Castellanos returned to Detroit on Tuesday night, arriving at Comerica Park in the bottom of the sixth inning, fresh off a Delta flight from Tampa, Fla., in which he sat first class but didn’t use in-flight internet access.

“I was pondering the score for pretty much 2 hours of the 2-hour, 30-minute flight,” Castellanos said.

He wondered whether or not he would get a pinch-hit at-bat after the Tigers had activated him from the disabled list hours earlier. If the game would be close, and if their big bats were up, probably not. But when the flight descended low enough to receive text messages, his dad told him the score.

“Once we were up by six, I was like, ‘For sure, he will get me an at-bat,’” Castellanos said.

When he arrived in the Tigers clubhouse, he hustled his uniform on and arrived in the dugout right before Justin Upton hit a three-run home run in the sixth inning to put the game out of reach.

In total on Tuesday, Castellanos went 3-for-4 with two doubles, accounting for the three at-bats he took in the Tigers instructional league in Lakeland, Fla.

He returns from the DL seven weeks after he fractured the fifth metacarpal in his left hand on a hit-by-pitch against the Mets on Aug. 6. His return was looking bleak as of last week, but his recovery took a turn for the better this past weekend.

“Saturday, my timing clicked and my hand felt a lot better,” Castellanos said. “It was kind of the turning point where everything started to come together for me.”

On Saturday, he phoned Ausmus telling him he wanted to return the next day, but the Tigers played it cautious, keeping him in TigerTown for two days. He likely will be in the lineup against the Indians tonight, Ausmus said.

Castellanos was in the midst of a breakout season when he was injured for the first time in his professional career. In 105 games, he is hitting .286 with 18 home runs and 58 RBI. In his absence, Tigers third basemen did not hit one home run.

About playing in the organization’s instructional league – which he was a part of in 2010-11 – Castellanos said: “It was fun to wake up and get back there and be back at instructs and kind of get back to my roots. It was a lot of fun, actually.”

He will lengthen a lineup that appears to be hitting its stride at the most opportune of times. In the past eight games, they have looked locked in. Now, they will likely have Castellanos hitting seventh in their lineup.
