---
HEADLINE: Max Scherzer's 20-K masterpiece vs. Tigers was 'sexy' and personal
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2016-05-12
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2016/05/12/detroit-tigers-washington-nationals-max-scherzer-20-strikeouts/84269620/
---

WASHINGTON – Max Scherzer sat by himself on the stage in Press Conference Room No. 1 at Nationals Park late Wednesday night, lounging in a rolling chair, spinning left, then right.

He had just iced down his electric right arm, which just threw one of the best games in baseball history. There were a handful of people around, a couple photographers, a few reporters, the rest still inside the Nationals clubhouse, gathering quote after quote from his current teammates about the domination he displayed against his former teammates in a complete game win over the Detroit Tigers. As he sat there in silence, waiting for the rest, one photographer just had to know: Did he think there was a chance?

“I knew I had a chance,” Scherzer said.

His mission had been accomplished. He had looked it up, he said, as if becoming the fifth pitcher in baseball history to strike out at least 20 batters in a game was a personal goal of his, and he recited the four that had done it before.

From the first of his 119 pitches, Scherzer was on a mission.

“He did seem when he was on the mound he had a little extra adrenaline,” Tigers manager Brad Ausmus said. “I thought he might, knowing Max.”

And by the time he threw the last, an 85 m.p.h. slider that resulted in a groundout by James McCann

“That’s some serious company,” he said. “It won’t sink in right now. But it’s an amazing accomplishment, especially to be able to get the win tonight.”

He got the win, all right. A win he wanted badly against his former team, which he respects greatly and talked about fondly in the days leading up to this full-circle contest between the Tiger-turned-National and National-turned-Tiger Jordan Zimmermann.

He allowed two runs on six hits and walked none in the win, joining Tom Cheney, Randy Johnson, Kerry Wood and Roger Clemens (twice) as the only pitchers to strike out 20 or more batters in a game.

“I almost needed the Tigers to come in and get me amped up to get me going,” Scherzer said. “Tonight, at the end of the night, it was a special night, because strikeouts are sexy. And to be able to punch out 20, it’s sexy.”

Of those 20 strikeouts, 18 were swinging. Of his 119 pitches, 97 were strikes.

“That’s as good as I’ve seen him,” Ausmus said. “He was dominant out of the gate.”

By the third inning, he had eight strikeouts. By the sixth, he had 13. In the seventh inning, he allowed a single to Victor Martinez, then a double to Justin Upton to put runners on second and third base with nobody out, before striking out McCann and Anthony Gose to end the threat.

He struck out the side in the eighth inning to a standing ovation.

“That was the first time I knew,” he said. “I was like, OK, I have a chance now to go out there for the ninth and get two strikeouts.

And he did, but it didn’t come without his breathing room eliminated.

J.D. Martinez led off the ninth with a solo home run on the first pitch to cut the Nationals’ lead to one. It was the second of two blemishes on the day for Scherzer – Jose Iglesias hit his first home run of the season in the third inning.

After J.D. Martinez’s home run, Miguel Cabrera struck out for a third time swinging on a 98 m.p.h. fastball before Victor Martinez singled for a third time and Upton waved at a slider for strikeout No. 20.

“There’s just something about 20 in a game,” Scherzer said.

It was something Cabrera hadn’t seen before from his former teammate.

“He was just different,” Cabrera said. “He got 20 strikeouts. That’s special. How many times do they do that in the big leagues? Five? How many years have they been playing this game? It was just special. I’ve never seen him throw the ball like that.”

Scherzer was amped from the outset, and said as much a day earlier. He wanted to beat his former team, to rise up to the challenge of facing Cabrera and get the last word in the back-and-forth with his friends.

“And I thought he might,” Ausmus said.

“He came out today and really wanted payback,” J.D. Martinez said.

“I wanted to beat that team,” Scherzer said.

He beat them with the latest display of his otherworldly stuff, which won the 2013 American League Cy Young Award with the Tigers and threw a pair of no-hitters last season. He beat them to leave no doubt that he is worth every dollar of the seven-year, $210 million contract the team did not pursue two off-seasons ago. He beat them the way Ausmus saw Clemens and Wood beat him in 20-strikeout games.

“It wasn’t quite as dominant as Kerry Wood and it was more dominant than Clemens,” he said.

Before the rush of reporters ran in, Scherzer small-talked with the small group of journalists about watching Wood against the Astros as a youngster in 1998. He had done his research. He knew the names. Now he is among them with a 20-strikeout game.
