---
HEADLINE: Tigers notes: Jordan Zimmermann faces crucial simulated game Sunday
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2016-08-20
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2016/08/20/detroit-tigers-jordan-zimmermann-simulated-game-sunday/89062976/
---

Pitching hasn’t been the Detroit Tigers’ problem.

Since the All-Star break, the team has a 3.41 ERA, third-best in baseball. Their starting pitching — considered by many the weak link down the stretch — has been stellar. But it’s hard to count on young arms like rookie right-hander Michael Fulmer and lefties Matt Boyd and Daniel Norris to duplicate their feats of the recent past.

Which is why Sunday’s simulated game for Jordan Zimmermann is important.

Zimmermann will throw a sim game before the series finale against the Red Sox, most likely more than the 30 pitches he threw in his last bullpen session on Thursday.

“I’m feeling a lot better,” Zimmermann said. “I was letting it go pretty good. I don’t know how it was coming out, but it felt like it was all right.”

Zimmermann mixed some sliders and curveballs into the fastball-heavy session, he said. The right-hander has been on the 15-day disabled list with a re-aggravation of a right neck strain since Aug. 5. He found some answers to his injury while visiting a physical therapist in Maryland recently, one he worked with during his six-year stint with the Nationals.

“We really didn’t have an answer to why everything was sore or tight or hurting, but I went there and we did a bunch of stuff and I feel like it helped quite a bit and relaxed a bunch of things,” he said. “I’ve been throwing and playing catch, and throwing off the mound feels way better now than it has when I was coming back the first time.”

Zimmermann, 30, has a 4.44 ERA and 1.30 WHIP in 16 starts, with 60 strikeouts in 971/3 innings. His first season after signing a five-year, $110-million contract with the Tigers this off-season has been mired by nearly two months on the DL.

“This is probably the most frustrating year of my career,” he said last week in Texas.

At that time, there were no plans to get him back on the mound, and he said he was going to take the recovery process slower than last, but here he is, about a week later, throwing a simulated game. The Tigers have been pleased with his progress.

“I think we’re still going slow,” Zimmermann said. “I’d like to go a little quicker, but that’s the program they got me on, and I’m just taking it one day at a time and just trying to get a little bit better everyday and come back and help this team win some ball games.”

“I think he’s really a Hall of Fame-caliber player offensively,” manager Brad Ausmus said.

Ortiz has tormented the Tigers in his career, hitting .293 with 35 home runs against them in 20 seasons. His grand slam in Game 2 of the 2013 American League Championship Series is often credited as the play that swung the momentum in favor of the Red Sox. They beat the Tigers in six games.

Ortiz is enjoying a great final campaign: This season, he is hitting .317 with 28 home runs and 95 RBIs.
