---
HEADLINE: Tigers notes: 27-hour trip worth it for Warwick Saupold’s mom
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2016-05-15
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2016/05/15/detroit-tigers-warwick-saupold-family-travels-australia/84425716/
---

BALTIMORE – Deanna Saupold’s eyes were glassy, her heart full.

Eyes glassy because she hadn’t slept in a couple days and had wept a short while earlier. Heart full, because she just watched her son, Warwick, make his major league debut against the Orioles on Saturday night. The next day, she watched as he picked up the win after

“Seeing him pitch in the game was something I’ll never forget,” she said on Saturday night. “I’m very proud. I started crying but held it together.”

It was the culmination of a lifelong dream for Saupold, who grew up in Perth, West Australia, started playing T-ball at age 4 and

“It’s been full-on,” she said. “Full-on.”

She found out over the phone on Friday Australia time, Thursday U.S. time, and within six hours was on a flight to Sydney, then Los Angeles, then Baltimore for the game.

“It was a phone call, a friend came over to help me do tickets and we were here,” she said. “That’s it.”

Saupold’s girlfriend, Georgia, came, too, but not his father, who doesn’t have a passport to travel. The last-minute ticket was more expensive from Los Angeles to Baltimore than Sydney to Los Angeles, she said. The last leg itself was more than $1,000.

When she arrived before the game, after first a flight from Perth to Sydney, then 16 hours from Sydney to Los Angeles, then four hours across the United States — a trip that totaled 27 hours, without any sleep — she put her bags in her hotel room and headed to the ballpark.

“It’s awesome because we sort of hoped he would get in, but we didn’t know whether he would or not,” she said.

He did, pitching two-thirds of a scoreless inning, then did again on Sunday in the most crucial of situations, keeping the Orioles scoreless so the Tigers could climb back into the game and win on back-to-back home runs in the eighth inning.

“When you walk away with a win, it’s good for the ballclub,” Saupold said. “It’s an exciting first one.”

He said he wasn’t nervous the day before, just a little more amped up.

“I had adrenaline,” he said. “Just before I got back on the mound, I kind of stood back and I had a look around and took it all in.”

When he did, he was too caught up in the moment to see his mom, waving the Australian flag while holding an iPad, crying.

“I can’t wait to see her,” he said. “It’s going to be good.”

Standing inside the visitor’s clubhouse at Oriole Park at Camden Yards, he had no clue how good it would be.

“I can’t wait,” she said. “I cannot wait. It’s going to be the biggest hug ever.”
