---
HEADLINE: Tigers likely to pass on bringing back catcher Jarrod Saltalamacchia
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2016-12-04
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2016/12/04/detroit-tigers-jarrod-saltalamacchia-free-agent/94980356/
---

NATIONAL HARBOR, Md. – Jarrod Saltalamacchia did his job this past season.

After signing for a league-minimum salary with the Detroit Tigers for 2016, Saltalamacchia backed up starting catcher James McCann with a veteran presence.

He did not hit well -- .171 in 92 games – but afforded the team a left-handed hitting platoon option to McCann and a proven major league experience in the case he went down with an injury.

But it does not appear that Saltalamacchia will return to Detroit for next season.

Though a few teams are interested in Saltalamacchia’s services, the Tigers, to this point, are not one of them, according to a person with knowledge of the situation.

Saltalamacchia, 31, hit 12 home runs and 38 RBI this past season. Though he did not produce much offensively, he did deliver a number of game-winning hits for the Tigers this past season and received high marks from teammates and coaches alike for his clubhouse presence.

Over the course of the season, young starting pitchers like American League rookie of the year award winner Michael Fulmer and lefty Matt Boyd leaned on him. Saltalamacchia served as Boyd’s personal catcher.

With no apparent interest in Saltalamacchia, if the team is prioritizing a lefty hitter to complement McCann, longtime Tiger Alex Avila could be a top target. Avila is the son of general manager Al Avila.

Outside of Saltalamacchia, Alex Avila and Matt Wieters – whom is considered out of the Tigers’ price range – there are no other notable lefty-hitting catchers on the free agent market.

Alex Avila, 29, hit .213 with seven home runs in 57 games with the White Sox in 2016. He played seven seasons with the Tigers prior to this past season and

Other options to back-up McCann include John Hicks, who spent much of this past season with Triple-A Toledo and currently is the organization’s only catcher outside of McCann with major league experience, and Bryan Holaday, another former Tiger who was non-tendered by the Red Sox recently. Both are right-handed hitters.

The Tigers likely would prefer to keep Hicks as major league insurance in the case of injuries, meaning a backup catching addition would likely come via free agency.
