---
HEADLINE: Blister shelves Detroit Tigers' Shane Greene for a few days
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2016-04-24
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2016/04/24/detroit-tigers-shane-greene/83468932/
---

If it was up to Shane Greene, he wouldn’t go on the disabled list.

“But it’s not up to me,” he said.

And it appears, in the immediate aftermath of the Detroit Tigers right-hander's injury-shortened start, that he will need some time to recover from a middle-finger blister that cropped up once again in Sunday’s 6-3 loss to the Cleveland Indians.

“The finger’s getting better,” he said. “It’s not the first time this has happened to me, this one may be a little bit more severe, but I’ll be alright.”

Greene was pulled after walking Indians shortstop Francisco Lindor to lead off the fourth inning. He allowed one run on two hits in three-plus innings, striking out two and walking two. He threw 52 pitches.

“I felt good, just attacking the strike zone, but it sucks that I put the team in this situation,” he said. “When I get into compete mode, I’m going to stay out there until they tell me I can’t pitch anymore.”

After meeting on the mound with manager Brad Ausmus and head trainer Kevin Rand, they yanked him, and Greene will not pick up a baseball for the next three days.

The blister has been a problem before, and the team tried to solve it with a super glue-like substance after the third inning, to no avail. There was a significant amount of blood from the blister.

“This one was over the top,” Greene said about the blood. “But the silver lining is I have blood in my fingers again. I could feel it coming. It’s happened before and I could feel that it might come and it did.”

Greene underwent off-season surgery to repair the circumflex artery in his pitching hand. The blister is not related.

If he is forced to the disabled list, the Tigers have an in-house option to fill his rotation spot in lefty Matt Boyd.

Rodriguez is dealing with a family issue, Ausmus said, and won’t return to the team for at least three days. He can miss between three and seven days on the family medical emergency leave list.

Without his closer on hand, Ausmus said lefty Justin Wilson and righty Mark Lowe would be in line for save situations, depending on the opponents’ matchups on hand. In those situations, righties Alex Wilson and Drew VerHagen and lefty Blaine Hardy could fill seventh-inning roles.
