---
HEADLINE: Verlander: With Fulmer, Boyd, Norris, Tigers’ rotation in good hands
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2016-09-21
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2016/09/21/detroit-tigers-justin-verlander-michael-fulmer-matt-boyd-daniel-norris/90817990/
---

MINNEAPOLIS – Justin Verlander isn’t surprised.

If you would have told him in spring training that in late September, the Detroit Tigers’ rotation would include Michael Fulmer, Matt Boyd and Daniel Norris — pitchers who started the season at Triple-A Toledo — he would have thought the team’s road to the postseason would be that much more difficult.

“But it’s a testament to what those guys have done,” Verlander said. “They’ve stepped up huge. All of them, really. I know Fulmer kind of gets the headlines because he’s done it all year, but what Boyd and Norris have done, especially as of late, has been awesome. So, I’m really happy to see those guys and really, even if we don’t win this year, I think it’s a great sign for this organization’s future, how successful those guys have been.”

Boyd turned in his latest big outing Tuesday night, pitching eight strong innings in a win over the Twins. It was a career-best performance. Now, the young trio will get the challenge of pitching in a postseason race against the defending World Series champions this upcoming weekend at Comerica Park.

Fulmer will start Friday, Norris Saturday and Boyd on Sunday.

They have posted a 3.50 ERA in 52 starts, at a time when the Tigers have needed to lean on the future sooner than expected with Jordan Zimmermann injured for more than two months and Anibal Sanchez and Mike Pelfrey ineffective much of the year.

“We wouldn’t be here without them,” manager Brad Ausmus said. “I think they’ve matured — they seem to have matured quickly — and you gotta give some credit to (pitching coach) Rich Dubee with that and a lot of credit goes to themselves.

“We wouldn’t be here if those three guys weren’t pitching the way they are.”

Boyd and Norris have come on in the second half. Fulmer has been pitching well since he arrived in early May. All have followed the lead of a veteran staff, anchored by Verlander.

“I think maybe kind of guiding or steering,” Verlander said. “But all three of those guys that you’ve mentioned have really been great. Anything that comes up, they’re not hesitating to ask me or Zim or Pelfrey or whoever, knowing that we’ve been through it before. That kind of a combination — they’ve been self-reliant and full of questions — that’s what you want.”

Verlander, of course, is the ace. And he will get his next taste of a career full of high-pressure starts tonight when

“When you’re in a chase to get into the playoffs, there’s a different intensity,” he said. “There’s obviously a lot more riding on every single start, and I know that every game counts the same. But when you’re down to this point in the season, it’s kind of glaring how much each game means.

“I like pitching in big games. I always have. Hopefully I have the opportunity to pitch in some really big games this year. But you can’t put the cart in front of the horse, so you gotta continue to grind and hopefully win as many games as you can.”
