---
HEADLINE: Ex-Tiger Joe Nathan beats odds, returns after 2nd major elbow surgery
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2016-07-26
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2016/07/26/joe-nathan-chicago-cubs-detroit-tigers/87593658/
---

CHICAGO – That day, everybody thought he was done.

Joe Nathan was 40, his right elbow hanging there with a torn ulnar collateral ligament and flexor tendon, beat up on the mound and by the fans during one full year in Detroit — not the lockdown closer they expected — and he was done. Had to be.

If he wasn’t going to announce his retirement in front of his locker at Comerica Park that day in April 2015, then he surely would soon after he realized the daunting road ahead. He had traveled it before, coming back from elbow ligament reconstruction, but he was younger then. His kids were getting older. He’d had a heck of a career.

“I will rehab and do everything I’m supposed to do as if I’m coming back to be a major league pitcher,” the six-time All-Star said instead that day. “That is my goal, to come back and pitch again.”

“I think as I expressed it when I first happened,” Nathan said, “I think there was never a doubt with me on my plan.”

To those close to him, there never was a doubt Nathan would return. The right-hander is back in the big leagues with the Chicago Cubs, a few days removed from completing an improbable comeback from a second major surgery.

Even if his mind was insistent on pitching again, his arm didn’t have to cooperate. Even if he got back on that mound, the stuff to get by might not be there.

“It’s always difficult,” he said. “It wasn’t an easy road. You always want to get healthy anyway from a surgery, so why wouldn’t I go about it the right way, go about it 100% and see where it takes me?”

It has taken him to a table inside the visitors clubhouse at U.S. Cellular Field, where Tuesday afternoon he was wearing a Cubs cut-off workout shirt, working a word search, explaining the process of proving people wrong again.

It was more aggressive than his surgeon, Dr. Keith Meister, would have liked, setting a schedule to return in a year rather than 18 months, but it needed to be, Nathan said, because: “Being at my age, I needed to at least show my face this season to have a chance to play.”

“A lot of the motivation is going out on your own terms,” he said. “And I still may not go out the way I want to, but I gave myself a chance now, and I think one big hurdle that I accomplished is getting back in this game and being able to step back on that mound and face big league hitters.”

The previous time was Opening Day 2015, when he struck out Minnesota’s Torii Hunter for the 377th save of his 16-year career, ranking eighth all time. After a disabled list stint following that game, he blew out his elbow during a rehabilitation assignment with Triple-A Toledo, ending his time with the Tigers, a time that wasn’t too pleasant.

Nathan said some things. Flicked his chin.

Asked whether there were things he regretted about his time in Detroit, Nathan said: “Absolutely. I don’t think anybody ever wants to have a bad experience or a bad relationship, even if it’s with people you don’t really know. I feel like all of my career, I’ve had a very good relationship with the fans, not only at home but on the road, and that was no different in Detroit.”

Nathan described that relationship as “kind of a love-hate.” He posted a 1.44 ERA and 0.89 WHIP against the Tigers as an opponent with the Twins and Rangers. Fans gave him grief warming up at Comerica Park as a visitor, and by the end of his first season, as a Tiger.

He saved 35 games in 2014, but blew seven and posted a 4.81 ERA, chalked up as the team’s latest closer problem.

“I think coming in, I probably had expectations of what the fans were like, and they probably had expectations of what I was supposed to do,” Nathan said. “Did things go well that first half? No, not at all. Not for me. Did it get bad? Absolutely. The frustration came out and stuff I said ... I’ve said numerous times I wish I could take back, but in the heat of the moment, it just happened.”

Tigers fans didn’t get to know the real Nathan, the father off the field, the well-liked and respected guy in baseball circles, not when his fastball was in decline and their urgency to win a World Series was at an all-time high. They probably never will.

But after a year off, back in the big leagues and his arm feeling fresh, he could trot in from the bullpen against them again.

“I hope in due time, as time does heal, I hope if I ever get back there and play, I’m sure it will be a fun atmosphere,” he said. “I’m sure it will be a fun atmosphere, I’m sure I’ll get grief, but hopefully just as I did as a road player before.”

He won’t hold his breath. But he can hope.
