---
HEADLINE: Tigers' Justin Verlander would join elite company with 2nd Cy Young
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2016-10-04
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2016/10/04/justin-verlander-hall-of-fame/91534156/
---

Maybe, Brad Ausmus said, this is just the first phase.

Maybe there will be another phase to Justin Verlander’s evolution.

“Maybe there will be a Phase II, I’m not sure,” said Ausmus,

Or maybe this simply is what Verlander always has been: The best right-handed pitcher of this decade and one of the best pitchers in baseball, possessing a rubber arm like his idol Nolan Ryan and a resume that will put him in Hall of Fame contention.

That resume would get a big boost this winter if the Baseball Writers Association of America votes to give Verlander the American League Cy Young Award.

Verlander led the AL in strikeouts (254), WHIP (1.00) and WAR (6.6), according to baseball-reference.com. His batting average against was .207, lowest among

Said one AL Cy Young voter: “When you really dig into the numbers, he comes ahead so many times.”

And if Verlander wins the award in early November, he will join an elite pantheon of pitchers. Only 17 in baseball history have won the Cy Young Award twice. Ten already have been enshrined in Cooperstown. Roy Halladay and Johan Santana will be on the ballot in the coming years. Two others -- Clayton Kershaw and Tim Lincecum -- are still active. The three who could have been voted in but haven't are Roger Clemens, Bret Saberhagen and former Tiger Denny McLain.

Verlander started to stack up his Hall of Fame credentials by winning AL rookie of the year a decade ago. His case gained legitimacy after a two-year stretch of dominance in 2011-12, when he won the AL Most Valuable Player Award and his first Cy Young Award and then fell one first-place vote short of repeating, losing out to David Price in the closest vote in history.

When Verlander struggled through a 2014 season at less than full health, his fastball sitting in the low-90 m.p.h. range with little life, it was hard to envision him reclaiming his post as one of the best pitchers in the AL. Now he has, thanks to that swing-and-miss fastball with tons of spin, a newfound interest in studying opponents and a competitive drive that makes the Hall of Fame seem more of a likelihood than possibility, should he stay healthy.

“Certainly, he’s had a renaissance,” Ausmus said. “He’s doing things better than he was in his Cy Young prime.”

But maybe he’s still in his Cy Young prime.
