---
HEADLINE: Big Papi's memories of Detroit go back almost 20 years
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2016-08-22
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2016/08/22/david-ortiz-detroit-tigers/89108524/
---

David Ortiz doesn’t have many memories of Tiger Stadium. He played just two games there, with the Minnesota Twins in 1998.

But he has one, and -- as he said before

“So one day,” he said, “I come out, and somebody said, ‘Hey, you gotta see who’s hitting batting practice outside and hitting balls out of the stadium. And I just dress up and walk out. Guess who it was?”

From another spot in the Boston Red Sox's clubhouse, second baseman Dustin Pedroia knew.

Fielder’s dad, Cecil, was long gone from Detroit -- the Tigers traded him to the New York Yankees in 1996 and he was finishing up the final season of his career between the Angels and Indians -- but his future All-Star son wasn’t.

“He was hitting balls out of the stadium and he was, like, 13,” Ortiz said. “So I told Prince about it, and he was so happy when I said that to him. I was like, ‘Yeah, dude, I just went out and seen the opening show that you put on. You put on a show.' He was hitting balls out of the stadium, off the roof.”

Ortiz capped off nearly 20 seasons of visiting Detroit with a couple of gifts, a pregame celebration and two more home runs this weekend, cementing his spot as one of the top Tiger tormentors of all time. Against the Tigers, Ortiz is a .296 hitter with 36 regular-season home runs -- the most against any team not in the American League East division. That’s not counting the grand slam that turned the tide in Game 2 of the 2013 AL championship series, an iconic shot into the Tigers' bullpen that had Torii Hunter toppling over the short fence at Fenway Park.

Still, Tigers fans stepped up to the plate Sunday afternoon, giving Ortiz a standing ovation before his last at-bat in the seventh inning. It grew even louder after he grounded out to the third baseman stationed in short rightfield.

“I think our fans did a tremendous job,” Tigers starter Justin Verlander said. “Obviously, he’s a big personality in this game, and our fans respected that and did a great job giving him an ovation there.”

Said Tigers manager Brad Ausmus: “It’s nice. I think the baseball fans in Detroit, as much as they don’t want to see Papi come to the plate, respect what he’s done and respect his career and they showed their appreciation. I thought it was deserving and very nice.”

Before the game, Ortiz showed off a custom-made guitar from Venezuelan artisan Pablo Canela, gifted to him by some of the Tigers’ Venezuelan contingent: Miguel Cabrera, Victor Martinez, Francisco Rodriguez and Omar Vizquel.

“It’s great, man,” he said. “I always really appreciate the fact that people take their time to what they do. But those guys are family to me, Miguel and Victor. Those guys are like little brothers to me.”

Ortiz was instrumental in helping Martinez adjust to life as a designated hitter back when he joined the Tigers in 2011. He considers Martinez to be one of the underrated hitters of this decade.

“Oh, my God,” Ortiz said. “He’s ridiculous. Like, every at-bat. We talked about it a very long time ago. Every at-bat means something to us. So Victor takes his at-bats very seriously. He’s legit, man.”

Ortiz’s impact on the game could be seen throughout the weekend, as he spent significant time with Tigers leftfielder Justin Upton before Sunday’s game. Tigers rookie pitcher Michael Fulmer sought him out just to shake his hand. There were the conversations with Cabrera at first base and Martinez before the game. But nothing better exemplified what Ortiz has meant to baseball over the past two decades than the standing ovation he received from a fan base he has driven mad for so long.
