---
HEADLINE: Tigers' Verlander 'moved' by cause to help veterans
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2016-01-21
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2016/01/21/detroit-tigers-justin-verlander/79143456/
---

Justin Verlander had one more thing to say.

He had already talked about the renovation of the physical therapy wing at the Veterans Affairs medical center in Ann Arbor, already talked about his passion for helping veterans, and baseball, and more baseball. But after the speaker thanked the dozens in attendance for their time, the Detroit Tigers’ right-hander took the mic for a parting thought.

As he stood inside the wing dubbed “The Fastball Lounge,” made possible in part because of a personal donation — his latest to help veterans — many people, patients and workers alike, thanked him.

“Yeah, real quick,” Verlander said today on the Tigers’ winter caravan. “Standing here, a lot of people have said thank you to me while I’m here listening. That’s not what this is about. This is my way to say thank you to you, and this is something that I’m passionate about. So thank you, everybody.”

That passion has been evident since 2013, when he committed $1 million to start the “Wins for Warriors” program, which provides support to Iraq and Afghanistan veterans in the Detroit, Richmond and Norfolk, Va. areas. And it was once again on display this afternoon as Verlander cut the ribbon to open the newly renovated area.

Told afterwards he looked affected by the scene, the ace said: “I am. I’m trying to think of the right words. I’m moved. Honestly, it’s like I wish I could do more, and I’m trying to. But I feel, honestly, I’m honored to be here, and that’s why I took the mic at the end. I just wanted that to be clear to everybody there, because that’s how I feel.”

Verlander can’t pinpoint what specifically it is that draws him to the cause. Maybe it was playing college baseball at Old Dominion in Norfolk, Va., or his cousin doing multiple tours of duty in Afghanistan. “It’s just something I’m very passionate about,” he said.

The Fastball Lounge took a year and a half to complete, said Rob McDivitt, director of the Veterans Affairs Ann Arbor Healthcare System. It combines the physical therapy and occupational therapy divisions, which previously were on different floors.

“It’s a dramatic improvement in both the space and services,” McDivitt said. “It keeps everybody together, and it’s an affirmation of Justin Verlander’s commitment to veterans.”

One in attendance was Algonac’s Tim Fluary, who served in the Coast Guard from 1972-74 and had his his left leg amputated by choice because of the pain from lost cartilage.

“This donation is going to help the rest of us vets do a lot more things for ourselves,” he said.

It also helps shed more light on the treatment of mental health for veterans, which Verlander said “absolutely 100%” needs more awareness throughout the country.

“I feel honored to play this game because of these men and women,” he said. “I wouldn’t be able to play this game in this great country if it weren’t for them, and I want to give back, so I do.”
