---
HEADLINE: Long overlooked, Tigers' Ian Kinsler fueled by desire to stand out
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2016-07-09
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2016/07/09/detroit-tigers-ian-kinsler/86907832/
---

Ian Kinsler is sitting on top of the bench, talking about baseball, batting gloves on, bat in hand, trying to explain his approach to playing the game with an analogy about board games.

“You ever play, like, a board game with somebody that’s just a jerk about it?” he says. “Like, really, you’re going to do that? It’s in the rules, but, ‘Come on, man, we’re playing Sorry. Or we’re playing Monopoly. Take it easy.’ ”

It is Tuesday afternoon, and the Tigers’ second baseman is sitting in the visitor’s dugout at Cleveland’s Progressive Field, hours away from

“That’s the guy I want to be on the field when I play baseball,” he says. “And that might be bad, because I play against people like that, too, in Monopoly, but when I play baseball for some reason, that’s the way I play and that’s what makes me tick. That’s just always how I’ve approached the game since I was a young kid.”

Kinsler is 34 years old now, a lot less emotional in his later years but still with the same chip on his shoulder, once again overlooked amongst the best players in the game.

It’s something he’s used to. Been like that since Little League.

Kinsler was too young to be an All-Star back then. He was too small in middle school. There were too many draft picks on his team in high school, and he was given too little a chance in college. He hasn’t been flashy enough in the major leagues.

All he has been at every spot is a talented throwback player in a dirty jersey who now, after 11 seasons in the majors, keeps finding more fuel for the fire in the twilight of his career.

“I think the story about Ian generally as a person and baseball player, of course,” Howard Kinsler, Ian’s dad, said, “is what you see is Ian’s drive to be as good as the people that receive recognition that he’s never received.”

The fire started burning early. Long before the Rangers traded him away after the 2013 season. Way before he lost his starting job to Dustin Pedroia in college and didn’t get any scholarship offers out of high school.

Probably back to that one time when he was watching the All-Star game with his dad.

The pitchers were either 11 or 12 years old, but it made no difference.

Ian Kinsler, who was 10 years old and too young to be picked in the Little League All-Star game at the time, would have hit them.

“I can recall him saying something like, ‘I can hit this pitching, Dad,’ ” Howard Kinsler said. “That was probably when it all fermented.”

It marked the first instance in a career of consistently being an afterthought on the baseball diamond.

In middle school, there was the kid that moved in from the other town. Kinsler threw hard, but this kid threw harder.

“There’s always those kids that are bigger and stronger than everybody,” he says, long since grown into his 6-foot, 190-pound athletic frame. “They throw faster and they get all the recognition. They were the superstars, not that I wasn’t a good player, but back then, I always wanted to be considered that superstar player.”

Growing up in Tucson, Ariz., the son of Howard, a longtime prison warden, and Kathy, who worked for the county, Kinsler played with four other future big leaguers at Canyon del Oro High School. He didn’t get as much as a sniff from Division I colleges but was drafted by the Diamondbacks in 2000 on the recommendation of an area scout who always stuck around to watch infield practice and saw glimpses of what the scrappy second baseman could become.

After playing at a local junior college his freshman year, Kinsler transferred to Arizona State, to play for one of the most loaded college programs in the country. At ASU, head coach Pat Murphy planned to move an equally competitive, just as undersized shortstop — Pedroia — to second base to make room for Kinsler. But six or so games into the season, Kinsler lost his job, and sat on the bench watching Pedroia the rest of the season.

Murphy tried to get Kinsler to stay for another season, but sensing a better opportunity elsewhere — no doubt stung by sitting — he headed to Missouri, where Rangers area scout Mike Grouse saw his winning baseball career blossom in a big way.

“The one thing that he had and he always had it from the moment he stepped on the University of Missouri campus was he was a winner,” Grouse said. “They hadn’t been to a regional for a long time, hadn’t won, hadn’t done much, and this guy came in and said, ‘We’re going to a regional. Get your mind-set right because we’re going to a regional.’ ”

With Kinsler at shortstop, they did. Sometime in the summer after his junior year in 2003, after he was drafted in the 17th round by the Rangers, he found himself at a Chili’s in western Missouri signing his first professional contract with Grouse.

The thing Grouse noticed first about Kinsler was the edge.

“It’s a good edge, it’s a competitive edge and he’s had it for as long as I’ve seen him,” Grouse said. “And that’s why he’s doing what he’s doing. He’s not afraid of the hard work. He’s just not afraid, period.”

Still undersized at the outset of his professional career, Kinsler built on his first year of weight training at Missouri and started eating more, squatting more and, for the first time in his career, hitting the ball farther.

“When I got drafted, I looked at all the other players in the organization and they were all big and strong and physically able to do things that I wasn’t able to do,” he said. “I knew I had to change that aspect of my game and that’s when it all started coming together physically.”

In the minor leagues, he hit with power he hadn’t before and rose to the big leagues with the Rangers in just three years, hitting the first of

“Right out of the chute you could see it with Kins,” longtime teammate Michael Young said. “When he came up, he was really emotional, all the emotions he wore on his sleeve and I think there were times that didn’t enable him to be as consistent as he liked.”

Kinsler credits Young’s tutelage as a big reason he morphed into a franchise player in the prime of his career, when he served as one of the cornerstones during the most successful stretch in Rangers history. Putting it in simple terms, Kinsler says Young helped channel the motivation of having a chip on his shoulder into more consistency on the field.

“He was just the consummate pro,” Kinsler said. “Everyday to the field the same way, everyday to the field ready to play, extremely consistent, had fun. I probably learned more from just watching him in how he prepared and played the game than I did from listening to him.”

In Texas, Kinsler broke out with a 30-home-run, 30-stolen-base season in 2009. After falling a win short of the franchise’s first World Series title in both 2010 and 2011 and becoming one of the game’s better players, Kinsler signed a five-year contract extension in 2012 that seemed to cement his spot as the Rangers’ centerpiece.

“He’s very old school,” Howard Kinsler said. “He really bought into the idea of, ‘I want to be on the same team my whole career’ and he was thinking that could happen.”

But early in the 2013 off-season, the Rangers traded Kinsler to the Tigers for first baseman Prince Fielder in what has looked like a lopsided trade. In the two-plus seasons since, Kinsler has out-performed Fielder, speeding up at a time when middle infielders are thought to slow down.

The trade stung at first. He said some things. But in hindsight, Kinsler wonders if perhaps it was just what he needed, the latest log thrown into the fire of the baseball lifer.

“It added to that,” he said. “It definitely added to the review of yourself, the mirror check. I definitely wanted to show my best self when I got here. So I kind of had to analyze what I was doing on the field and where I could get better. I felt like I had a lot more to offer as a player.”

Ask Kinsler if he thinks he is playing the best baseball of his career and he doesn’t hesitate.

Ask him why, and he says, “Just plain and simple: Experience.”

When he looked in the mirror three winters ago, he saw an inconsistent offensive player. So before he arrived in Detroit, he went back to the drawing board, embarking on a nearly two-year process to change his swing. Last season, which he calls “the toughest of my career” because of the Tigers’ last-place finish, he wanted to hit the ball on a line more. The improvements started showing near the midway point. This season, those line drives are carrying over the fence more.

“There were some uncomfortable moments,” he says. “But sometimes you gotta go to those places. You still try to figure out ways to make yourself better and more consistent and it just kind of all happened together as far as the maturity and experience and revamping my swing a little bit. It kind of all came together.”

In 85 games this year, he is hitting .290 with 16 homers and 52 RBIs and an on-base plus slugging percentage of .835.

Those improvements aren’t limited to the batter’s box. Kinsler plays Gold Glove-caliber defense. He is the Tigers’ best baserunner with a combination of speed and smarts. He is an annoyance to opponents, the Tigers’ aggressor on the field, part leader and teacher inside the clubhouse, passing along Young’s wisdom to young infielders like Nick Castellanos and Jose Iglesias.

Ask how much pride he takes in being a two-way player, he says, “Three-way player. I want to affect the game in any way you possibly can. I don’t see any other way to play.”

Ask what he plays for, he says, “Winning. This organization has already won a World Series and they’re so thirsty for another one. Detroit is so Tigers-crazy that you win a World Series in Detroit, you’re looking at statues, you’re looking at stuff that keeps you a legend in Detroit forever and those are the kind of things that you play for.”

The kind of recognition that Kinsler hasn’t often received.

After a few days in limbo, not knowing where he’d go, Kinsler will spend this week’s All-Star break at home. Maybe take the family to the lake.

He wasn’t selected by the fans in the AL Final Vote, finishing fourth out of five players for the final spot on the All-Star team. Although Kinsler may be the best second baseman of this generation with the Baseball Hall of Fame possibly in his future, people don’t recognize him when he flies commercial. He learned to let it go a long time ago.

“I was never really recognized as one of the best players and I think that’s always just kind of been the chip on my shoulder,” he says, “That I always and still do think that I can impact a game more than a lot of players.”

He has mellowed in his mid-30s, on and off the field, no longer as hot-headed as he was as a youngster, a dad now, not afraid of much except maybe heights. His confidence has grown with experience, his motivation now on the bigger picture: Being a better baseball player, husband and dad.

“Just growing up,” he says. “Experience outside of baseball. Knowing life, understanding what’s important. Kids, wife, all those things kind of play into your mind-set and I think all those things come together.”

These days, he thinks of lengthening his playing years not for career statistics, but for his young son, Jack, who often tags along at Comerica Park. He feels the urgency to win a World Series with the Tigers not only for himself, but for his teammates that have come so close. And he doesn’t mind not getting recognized for his work now, because he knows it will come in the future.

“I think a lot of that is empty, you know?” he says. “I think the way you’re received by your teammates, when we’re all 60-70 years old, how are they going to remember me as a teammate? When they hear my name, what are they going to think about?”

Ian Kinsler ranks among the top second basemen in several categories since debuting in 2006. His ranks during that span:
