---
HEADLINE: Fenech: Tigers GM charged with cutting payroll he didn’t balloon alone
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2016-11-07
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2016/11/07/detroit-tigers-al-avila-baseball-winter-meetingss/93459870/
---

SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. – Al Avila arrived late at the Major League Baseball general managers meetings Monday afternoon, his flight from Detroit delayed an hour or so.

The flight delay wasn’t his fault. Neither is a portion of the payroll problem that is on his hands. But it’s a problem Avila contributed to with wild spending last off-season that couldn’t deliver enough wins.

The Detroit Tigers, who have spent money over their heads for the better part of the past decade — and even more so lately, pushing their payroll to well over $200 million this past season — need to cut costs.

Avila, standing outside the Omni Scottsdale Resort, spoke about the Tigers’ plans this off-season: Those have not been set in stone at this point and likely will not be for some time until he can parse the trade market to find the right balance of outgoing money and incoming young talent in exchange for some of the team’s most talented players.

Avila likely doesn’t know which direction the team will go at this point. What he does know is the Tigers must cut payroll, perhaps by as much as $20 million, and if there are not willing participants to take on some contracts, or if he can’t creatively find a way to find some middle ground, he could be forced to sacrifice two of the best players in franchise history.

He is stuck between a rock and a hard place. Fans have grown accustomed to owner Mike Ilitch opening his pocketbook in an attempt to win an elusive World Series, which hasn’t worked. Now, facing a second consecutive season beyond MLB’s luxury tax limit — which would charge the team 30% on its final personnel bill —– he is faced with the tall task of keeping the team competitive without the financial freedom of years past.

That likely will mean trading key contributors whose contracts expire after the season, like second baseman Ian Kinsler ($11 million) or rightfielder J.D. Martinez ($11.75 million). It almost certainly means they will not enter next spring training as a championship contender.

Avila said last month the process would be difficult. He said it multiple times. He watched former GM Dave Dombrowski — no doubt influenced by Ilitch — sign many long-term lucrative contracts, some of which the Tigers would love to get off their hands. Right-hander Anibal Sanchez’s $16.8 million owed in 2017 comes to mind.

But Avila can’t be entirely absolved of blame for the team’s dire financial straits this off-season. Without $8 million owed to right-hander Mike Pelfrey or $22.125 million owed to leftfielder Justin Upton or $5.5 million owed to reliever Mark Lowe, the team would not be in a position to potentially be forced to part ways with Verlander or Cabrera, who are still performing at elite levels.

It will be a fascinating off-season, one in stark contrast to years past, when the Tigers tackled the off-season with an eye on addition via free agency. At the GM meetings last year, Avila spent most of his downtime meeting with agents. This year, he will be laying the groundwork for trades that will limit the team’s competitiveness in the short term while trying to find a more sustainable model of success in the long term.

It will not be easy. It’s not entirely his fault. But Avila has a financial mess on his hands, and he is forced with cleaning it up before it’s too late.
