---
HEADLINE: Harbaugh brings camp tour to his beloved in-laws
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2016-06-17
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/college/university-michigan/wolverines/2016/06/17/jim-harbaugh-satellite-camp-tour/86073238/
---

BLUE SPRINGS, Mo. – Think of it this way, Jimmy Cain says, pointing at an empty water bottle.

“This is a gigantic 11-man family,” he says. “We got a bunch of people jumping in.”

Cain, the head varsity basketball coach at Blue Springs High School, jumped in first, marrying Amy, one of Merle and Alta Feuerborn’s five daughters. Then, one Easter many moons ago, came the man who, on this sweltering hot Midwest evening, is barking orders on the football field through a megaphone.

Jim Harbaugh introduced himself to his wife Sarah’s family — which includes 10 siblings — that Easter in a casual game of 3-on-3 basketball, a friendly game, until, Cain recalls, Amy, the designated official, called Harbaugh for a personal foul.

“We didn’t even hardly know him,” Cain says. “And he just stops and turns to her and goes, ‘Call it right, Amy. You’re not calling it right. You’re not calling it fair. You’re calling fouls on me and Jimmy’s getting away with everything. Just call it right.’ So Amy kind of starts giggling and Jim, he’s just like, dead serious.”

Those who know the second-year Michigan football coach best know that Harbaugh takes three things seriously above all else.

“Faith, family and football,” says John Feuerborn, Harbaugh’s brother-in-law and close confidant, who has been traveling with him on a weekly basis since his days at Stanford. “He’s a football guy, obviously, but that’s not first and foremost for him.”

And Wednesday’s camp stop in the Kansas City suburb — Harbaugh is traveling around the country on a tour of high school football satellite camps — shed more light on Harbaugh, the family man, and why this football man, so successful coaching at the highest level in the NFL, is here, on a high school football field, wearing his trademark khakis and a navy blue U-M cap.

John Feurborn, one of Sarah’s six older brothers — Marty, Paul, Mike, Joe and the late Andrew are the others, Harbaugh recites proudly — has been at Harbaugh’s side, weekend after weekend since his first road game with the San Francisco 49ers in Philadelphia in 2011, when Sarah called and asked if he would go keep him company.

Feuerborn owns a bar in the Kansas City area. He is Harbaugh’s youngest son Jack’s godfather, and during those Saturday nights holed up in hotel rooms and Sunday mornings inside locker rooms, on vacations and yearly trips to Peru, he formed a brotherly bond with Harbaugh.

“John’s a trusted agent, known friend and beloved brother-in-law,” Harbaugh says. “He’s a real ally. A real asset. And he’s a guy (who) tells me if he thinks I’m wrong about something and he’ll shoot straight with me, which is a very, very good thing.”

So when NFL team after NFL team came after Harbaugh two winters ago, and when Harbaugh kept coming back to his alma mater, Feuerborn knew.

“If we were talking about something else, what about this team or that team, he would say, ‘What about Michigan? What about Michigan?’ Once he did that — and he did that several times — I said, ‘This is where you want to go,’ ” Feuerborn recalls.

And more than following in the footsteps of former coach Bo Schembechler or restoring the prestigious U-M program to the top of the collegiate ranks, Feuerborn knows family was the biggest factor in Harbaugh’s return to Ann Arbor.

“The family part of the thing is what drove him on this because he did have this vision that he had talked about all the time,” Feuerborn says. “Me moving up there with my family, his parents, kids being able to come to work. I think it’s more beneficial to the family. Helps the family. Because the kids, they’re at Schembechler Hall all the time. He can take Addy to school, take Jack to practice. That was his whole vision, his whole goal. Get his mom and dad to move up there. He wanted my mom and dad to move up there. He wanted everybody to live in one little neighborhood.”

That vision is still taking shape — Feuerborn has two daughters in high school in nearby Leawood and his parents still live in the area — but the family foundation Harbaugh married into after meeting Sarah at a P.F. Chang’s in Las Vegas some 10 years ago has long since been solid, a full family that took him some time to break in.

“It took a while,” Harbaugh said. “I was the one working, selling myself to them. They were the ones that had the eye on me and put me through the ringer.”

About memorizing all 11 names of the Feuerborn clan, Harbaugh said, “That was my job. I was out to impress.”

And eight years into his marriage with the youngest Feuerborn sibling, Harbaugh has done just that.

“Yeah, he’s famous and did all these things, athletic accomplishments, but that’s secondary, tertiary,” Feuerborn said. “The main thing is how he’s going to take care of your sister, and he couldn’t be better in that regard.”

Wednesday was just another satellite camp in a summer full of them, but for Harbaugh, it was the rare opportunity to bring football and family together.

“I would have to say it’s definitely one of the most special ones,” Harbaugh said. “It’s an incredible family to be in. I’m very lucky.”
