---
HEADLINE: Don't judge the Detroit Tigers by latest tough stretch
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2017-05-29
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2017/05/29/detroit-tigers-trade-deadline/352880001/
---

CHICAGO &ndash; Good morning, Detroit. Happy Memorial Day.

Your baseball team is terrible right now.

The Tigers cannot hit. They cannot pitch. They cannot field or run the bases or do anything that resembles a postseason-caliber team, the kind of team you have been accustomed to watching summer after summer for the past decade.

The Tigers look listless and lethargic and like a losing bunch. They arrived in Kansas City on Sunday night for the final three games of a ruthless road trip which can&rsquo;t end soon enough.

This was all so predictable. From the minute they touched down in Houston around 4:30 a.m. last Monday to a night later, when it became painfully obvious that the next week was going to resemble that mid-May week last season when manager Brad Ausmus was almost fired.

Now, the Tigers have lost six of the first eight games of this road trip. And while none of the losses were particularly surprising in the least, and many want to dismantle the team before the calendar flips to June.

So, a pause for patience: The Tigers are about where they should be, given the circumstances. Given the fact they did not have J.D. Martinez for the first six weeks of the season, or Miguel Cabrera for more than a week, Ian Kinsler for a week and counting, the current state of doom and gloom is not anywhere close to where it could have been.

A quick look at the still way-too-early American League standings show the Tigers five games behind the Minnesota Twins in the Central Division and three games back of the second wild-card spot entering Monday. Yes, the Cleveland Indians between the Tigers and a wild-card spot, and yes, the Indians are sitting in a similar scenario to the Tigers in that they have not yet fulfilled their long-term potential, but baseball is a 162-game season and we are just 50 games deep.

Breathe. Bear with me. It&rsquo;s not easy, I know, not with the way this team is slogging their way through this stretch, seemingly disinterested in the task at hand, unable to even fake a certain kind of fire on any given night recently.

You don&rsquo;t want to hear it, but this is a tired team and stretches like this happen. They happen to every team in every season. Yes, there is urgency. But not enough for the two-months-away trade deadline to be top of mind at this time, or for general manager Al Avila to be sending messages through the media, which was one of the more inaccurate things I&rsquo;ve opined.

The Tigers are flawed. You see it, I see it, and there is an experienced front office that sees it. But find me a team without flaws, and I&rsquo;ll point out that the defending Chicago Cubs had two more wins than the Tigers before play Monday.

I didn&rsquo;t think the Tigers were a postseason team at the beginning of the season and I don&rsquo;t think they&rsquo;re a postseason team now, but I definitely think they&rsquo;re a better team than they&rsquo;ve shown as of late. And I still think there&rsquo;s a better chance of them being in contention on July 31 than not.

The talent remains on the roster. Improvements are mandatory, beginning with Jordan Zimmermann. Their big players need to step up, especially Justin Verlander and Miguel Cabrera. Maturation is necessary from youngsters like Nick Castellanos and Daniel Norris. And do they ever need Kinsler&rsquo;s hamstring to cooperate for the long haul.

But with 112 games remaining, the division remains there for the taking.

That is, unless you want to hand it to the Twins. Or give up on Verlander and Cabrera. Or trade Martinez for a more underwhelming return than you&rsquo;d imagine, and anyone else with value on the trade market for a faux fire sale in the name of overreacting.

The Tigers are OK. They will be back home at Comerica Park soon enough, playing an easier schedule than they have thus far, tantalizing you once again as the team they can be when things are going well, making you forget about the team they have been during the toughest road trip of the season.
