---
HEADLINE: Baseball agent Scott Boras: Mike Ilitch's passion 'made him a winner'
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2017-02-10
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2017/02/10/detroit-tigers-owner-mike-ilitch-death-scott-boras/97776686/
---

It was, Scott Boras recalled, one of the best phone calls he ever received in his life.

It was after the Detroit Tigers came closer than they ever would to winning a World Series under longtime team owner Mike Ilitch’s watch, in 2006, after the roar of a historic baseball city was restored.

And it illustrated the friendship of a baseball agent and owner, two unlikely friends bonded by the love of the game.

The Tigers – led by a number of Boras’ big-name players – had just lost to the Cardinals in the World Series. Yet the tone of Ilitch’s voice on that night was not of defeat, Boras said, but of the accomplishment Ilitch included him in.

“And it was then,” Boras remembered on Friday night, after the owner died earlier in the afternoon, “That I really realized that Mike Ilitch was a very unique man. Because few people in this world have a vision for their passion like Mike did.”

Boras paused for a lengthy moment to collect his thoughts.

“In the end, what made Mike Ilitch a winner was his passion,” Boras said. “Because he really, really studied the game. He loved those who studied it. These weren’t business decisions. This was something that was very close to his heart. And it was very easy for me – an honor, frankly – for me to tell players about Mike Ilitch. Because he stood for what the model of ownership is.”

Boras has worked with plenty of owners in his career, but perhaps the most cherished of that work came with Ilitch, who would often pick up the phone to talk baseball, two minor league players turned successful businessmen in the game.

They first collaborated – with the help of former general manager Dave Dombrowski – on signing All-Star catcher Pudge Rodriguez at a time when the Tigers were the laughingstock of baseball, a few months removed from setting an American League record in losses.

“He had a trust in his understanding of players,” Boras said. “He really wanted reasons from me and we had numerous phone calls about why he should believe in a player and he wanted to know more and more about them. He was so excited when Pudge came to Detroit and that he believed in Pudge and Pudge believed in him was a testament to his vision.”

Two years after Rodriguez signed, so, too, did All-Star outfielder Magglio Ordoñez.

In their first face-to-face meeting at Comerica Park, Boras remembered Ilitch pulling a Red Wings Stanley Cup championship ring out of his pocket, to prove to Ordoñez that he was a championship owner.

A year later, the Tigers won the AL and started on the path of perennial contention, which Boras saw in Ilitch’s eyes and heard in his voice when he spoke about the city of Detroit and its people.

“The Detroit Tigers were so personal to him,” Boras said. “This city, he really had a provincial approach that went well beyond business and it was really something that was so pure, it was so real, it was sincere.”

Just like that conversation after the Tigers lost in the 2006 World Series.

“It was almost like it was a matter of teamwork,” Boras said. “Because when Pudge and Magglio signed, it was something that both of us were really viewed at as it was the wrong decision for everyone. So it was almost as though Mike and I worked on something collectively to create something."

In the decade that followed, Ilitch would ink a number of Boras’ other players.

“It was just something, he kept trusting what I had to say,” Boras said. “And I kept telling players what kind of an owner I thought he was and to have all the players that got to the World Series, it was just very rewarding for both of us.”
