---
HEADLINE: Detroit Tigers parted ways with Brad Ausmus 2 years too late
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2017-09-23
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2017/09/23/detroit-tigers-brad-ausmus/695334001/
---

Brad Ausmus was dropping a hint.

Before Thursday&rsquo;s game against the Minnesota Twins, the fourth-year Detroit Tigers manager &ndash; a known lame duck as September wore on &ndash; spoke of the team&rsquo;s hitters returning next year and said, &ldquo;the manager will have to figure out where they all hit.&rdquo;

Ausmus didn&rsquo;t delve into the details behind the phrasing. He didn&rsquo;t say if he wanted to return for a fifth season in 2018. But he already knew the answer.

Tigers general manager Al Avila &ndash; a longtime supporter of Ausmus &ndash; told him Wednesday night

&ldquo;As we transition the ballclub in a new direction, I feel it&rsquo;s best we have a new approach and a fresh start with the manager position,&rdquo; Avila said in a statement.

In talking with people inside the Tigers&rsquo; organization over the past three seasons, the notion that Ausmus was not the right manager for this team often was repeated.

It became clear by late last season, when the Tigers fell 2 &#189; games short of the second American League wild-card spot. Early this season, as they struggled to find consistency from the start, it became even more clear: Avila&rsquo;s words of a new approach and fresh start came 2 years too late.

The Tigers, who had a $200 million payroll and tons of flawed talent this season, hired Ausmus in November 2013 as the successor to longtime manager Jim Leyland. Ausmus was hired by former general manager Dave Dombrowski, and he was hired to win. In four seasons, the Tigers reached the postseason once, getting swept by the Orioles in the 2014 American League Division Series. In that first season, the Tigers won their fourth consecutive AL Central division championship. This season, they are in danger of their second last-place finish in three years.

A large part of the Tigers&rsquo; 2014 success could be credited to veteran outfielder Torii Hunter, the team&rsquo;s leader and clubhouse policeman. When Hunter left in free agency after the season, so too did Ausmus&rsquo; chief motivator.

In hindsight, Dombrowski&rsquo;s hiring of a first-year manager to take the reins of a veteran team was a bad one. Ausmus, a player&rsquo;s manager to a fault, was not the right fit for a team that needed more conviction than comfort from a leader.

Instead of making up for Dombrowski&rsquo;s mistake, Avila twice made the same mistake of retaining Ausmus. A month after Avila was hired to the general manager position, shortly after the Free Press and multiple news outlets reported Ausmus would not return in 2016, Ausmus was brought back for a third season.

According to multiple people with knowledge of the situation, the Tigers reached out to at least one potential managerial candidate in the weeks after Avila assumed the role. But Avila believed  Ausmus, with more experience, would evolve into the right manager for the job and convinced late team owner Mike Ilitch to stick with him for another season.

After an injury-riddled and still flawed team came up short last season, Avila made the mistake again, exercising Ausmus&rsquo; contract option for 2017.

By that point, cracks of accountability had begun to show inside the clubhouse. Ausmus&rsquo; everyday, smooth and steady message was not getting through. In-game decisions were questioned. His leadership style, as well.

On the field, Ausmus&rsquo; demeanor did not produce results when the team needed it the most. In each of the past three seasons, the Tigers had lengthy early season losing streaks and were unable to recover. Simply put, the team was too comfortable. The clubhouse was described as a country club by those inside the room, with an atmosphere lacking accountability that had manifested itself over three seasons.

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m the manager,&rdquo; Ausmus said Friday. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m in charge of it and I think the team should have been a little bit better this year despite the injuries so in that sense, I look in the mirror and say I&rsquo;m at fault.&rdquo;

Ausmus was well-liked by Tigers players. But perhaps that was part of the problem. Oftentimes he blended in as one of the guys, a former player recently removed from his playing days who routinely would field ground balls during pregame workouts.

He was handed a unique challenge when he was hired &mdash; not only to follow in the fiery Leyland&rsquo;s footsteps, but also to handle a clubhouse of well-paid superstars, including some whose performance had declined in earnest. It wasn&rsquo;t the situation to break in a rookie manager, as the Tigers&rsquo; window of opportunity was closing.

And, so, the immediate reaction to Friday&rsquo;s unsurprising news is that it had been a long time coming. But it should have come much sooner than Friday.  Avila had plenty of chances to right Dombrowski's wrong, and for that, he is to blame.

Avila is lauded by his employees for his loyalty, which can explain why Ausmus survived his first managerial stint without getting fired. The two had grown close over time and became friends, as Ausmus put it. But in the end, that loyalty is a big reason why the Tigers have nothing to show for the past two seasons.
