---
HEADLINE: Detroit Tigers' lack of toughness a big reason why they're fumbling 2017
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2017-07-29
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2017/07/29/detroit-tigers-lack-toughness-big-reason-why-theyre-fumbling-2017/523140001/
---

Sometime in early September, three seasons ago.

Probably on Sept. 10, 2014, when Lorenzo Cain singled to centerfield in the fourth inning of a pennant race game between the

When he got to first base that day, the Royals centerfielder remembered Victor Martinez trying to start a friendly conversation. But what happened next showed the difference between the two teams: One showed toughness. The other was the Tigers.

Though they trailed on the scoreboard at the time, the Tigers &ndash; the three-time reigning American League Central champions &ndash; had their way with Kansas City that season. They won the first two games of the three-game series, taking a half-game lead in the division, and were 11-4 against them heading into the game.

&ldquo;During that point in time, they had really been kicking our ass left and right,&rdquo; Cain said. &ldquo;So it just got to a point in time where I was just sick of it. I was sick and tired of them kicking our ass, pretty much, and I said I was just fed up with it.&rdquo;

The exact dialogue is a distant memory, but as Cain remembers: &ldquo;It was just, &lsquo;I&rsquo;m not out here to joke around. I&rsquo;m not out here to be friends. I&rsquo;m out here to play and it&rsquo;s all about us trying to find a way to beat y&rsquo;all.&rdquo;

Sitting in the middle of the clubhouse, scrolling through his phone after sweeping the Tigers in a 16-2 win on Wednesday night, teammate Mike Moustakas stood up and shouted, &ldquo;I love you guys! I just (really) love you guys!&rdquo;

A short while earlier, Moustakas was intentionally hit in the right leg by reliever Bruce Rondon, who didn't seem interested in pitching and looked irked that Cain scored from second base on a single in a blowout game. The benches cleared, it wasn&rsquo;t a brawl, but the Royals were the aggressor.

It was a fitting look at two teams that faced the same mid-season fate. One of those teams stepped up, found their way out of early struggles, and got to stick together. The other team was the Tigers.

The scene in the Royals clubhouse was a stark contrast across the hallway: After another loss, this one the most embarrassing of them all, the Tigers&rsquo; clubhouse was empty and quiet. Manager Brad Ausmus conceded they got their ass kicked. Justin Upton conceded it was embarrassing. There were few others around.

The tone is set by ownership, the front office and the manager. Players are just another rung in the chain of command, but perhaps the biggest part. Ultimately, their performance dictates any narratives about clubhouse chemistry and leadership and overall happiness.

Ask manager Brad Ausmus and some of his players who the Tigers' leaders are and they name, in no particular order, the usual suspects: Ian Kinsler, Miguel Cabrera, Justin Verlander and Martinez. Those four also happen to be the most tenured players on the team.

But as the year has tail-spun out of control &ndash; the trade rumors finally claiming a victim in team-favorite J.D. Martinez last week, with more likely to come &ndash; it&rsquo;s become clear to observers that the Tigers were not mentally tough enough to overcome the adversity they faced this season. There is simply too much talent in the clubhouse to be performing like one of the worst teams in the AL.

Yet, there is not enough talent to be performing like one of the best teams in the league. The Tigers are extremely flawed, and the team wilted under pressure.

It was never more evident than on Wednesday night, when they were pushed around &ndash; literally and figuratively &ndash; by the Royals, who continued to close the coffin on the Tigers' season. A week earlier, the Tigers stood two games behind Kansas City, who was slumping and also feeling the heat of trade deadline moves breathing down its neck. The Tigers won the first two games of the series and took a late lead in the third when Mikie Mahtook homered off Royals closer Kelvin Herrera. But the Royals fought back and beat closer Justin Wilson in walk-off fashion.

Leadership is a tricky thing. Players do not police themselves. The manager&rsquo;s hand often is forced by front-office moves. Most of the time, they collaborate in making decisions. Francisco Rodriguez openly questioned his role on the team and was rewarded with more high-leverage situations, which hurt the team. Rondon embarrassed the team and was rewarded with another high-leverage situation on Friday,

When Moustakas was hit on Wednesday night, the Royals had reached their breaking point. Tigers pitchers hit five of their batters during the four-game split at Kauffman Stadium. Two innings before Rondon&rsquo;s hit-by-pitch, Alex Gordon took one in the ribs.

The Royals, as we&rsquo;ve come to see, have each other&rsquo;s back. The mentality was forged from years playing together in the minor leagues, then getting beat up by the Tigers, and perhaps taken to a different level during that September 2014 series at Comerica Park with Cain&rsquo;s competitiveness.

&ldquo;Since that point on, I was just &ndash; we, as a team &ndash; were just out to prove something,&rdquo; Cain said. &ldquo;We set out a goal to go out here and lock in and try to do damage each and every time we step on the field.&rdquo;

It&rsquo;s the tough mentality of a team with a killer&rsquo;s instinct that plays the game together. A team that has won it all. A team that would not accept their time together was coming to an end. A team whose leadership is evident off the field and whose leaders were represented on the field when punches were nearly thrown.
