---
HEADLINE: Source: Detroit Tigers' Anibal Sanchez to start season in long relief
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2017-03-28
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2017/03/28/anibal-sanchez-detroit-tigers/99753158/
---

TAMPA – It appears the Tigers have made a decision on their starting rotation.

Right-handed pitcher Anibal Sanchez is expected to start the season as the team’s long-reliever, a person with knowledge of the situation said Tuesday. The move would make left-hander Matt Boyd the likely final starter when the club announces its rotation around Opening Day on April 3.

The person spoke on condition of anonymity because the Tigers haven't announced the move. Sanchez and Boyd have long been the leading contenders for the final spot in the rotation during spring training.​

Speaking before Tuesday night’s Grapefruit League game against the Yankees, manager Brad Ausmus offered no updates on the competition, but the decision likely was made earlier in the day when the team’s brass met at Joker Marchant Stadium.

Boyd, 26, has been the most impressive starting pitcher in camp.

In six appearances – five starts – he has posted a 2.49 ERA in 21 2/3 innings with 21 strikeouts and no walks. It would mark the first time in his career that he’s made an Opening Day rotation.

Boyd likely will make his regular-season debut at Comerica Park on April 8 against the Red Sox, when the team first needs a fifth starter.

Ausmus remained mum on the starters for the second and third games of the season against the White Sox, preferring to tell the pitchers first. It’s a near certainty that those pitchers will be righty Jordan Zimmermann and lefty Daniel Norris.

Sanchez stumbled out of the gate this spring but has performed well recently, throwing 16 consecutive scoreless innings with 14 strikeouts, including six no-hit innings against the Pirates on Saturday.

Sanchez, 33, is in the final season of a five-year, $80 million deal signed prior to the 2014 season. He is due $16.8 million this season and has a $16 million option for next season. It is unlikely the Tigers exercise that option.

The decision wasn’t tough in this regard: Boyd out-pitched Sanchez this spring.

It became tougher over the past two weeks, when Sanchez showed much improvement after tweaking his arm slot with pitching coach Rich Dubee.

His stuff has garnered rave reviews over that time.

It was thought the Tigers could put Sanchez in the rotation, send Boyd to Triple-A Toledo as the first call up and also keep veteran Mike Pelfrey, who is part of the team’s starting pitching depth.

Sanchez could up his trade value by continuing to pitch well and become an asset either on the mound or at the trade deadline if the team is out of contention.

The question now focuses on Pelfrey, who appears to be on the wrong side of a numbers game. Pelfrey could soon face the same fate as reliever Mark Lowe, who was unconditionally released on Sunday.

The writing appears to be on the wall: As recently as the last few days, the Tigers contacted at least one team offering Pelfrey and were willing to eat the entirety of his $8 million salary due this season, according to a person with knowledge of the situation.

Pelfrey, 33, went 4-10 with a 5.07 ERA and 1.73 WHIP in 2016, the first year of a two-year deal worth $16 million.

It would be hard to envision the Tigers going north with both Sanchez and Pelfrey as part of an already log-jammed bullpen.
