---
HEADLINE: Sipple: I grew up at the Free Press; now it's time to say good-bye
BYLINE: George Sipple
DATE: 2018-07-28
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/nhl/red-wings/2018/07/28/george-sipple-detroit-free-press/850912002/
---

After more than two decades working for my hometown paper, I'm leaving the Detroit Free Press. I'm excited about what's ahead as the Marketing and Public Relations Specialist at Novi Community School District.

The Free Press and its readers are special, and that's why I'm grateful I have a chance to say good-bye in this column.

I've struggled with what to say because I grew up at the Freep and have experienced so many wonderful memories. I covered just about every sport and every professional team in town.

I'm thankful to former bosses like Gene Myers and Owen Davis. They believed in me, even when I sometimes lacked self-confidence. I'm really thankful to copy editors, who saved me more than once.

I learned to budget my time &mdash; and credit card. I traveled across North America and made lifetime friends I would have otherwise never met. I even found love because of the Freep.

Even if you didn&rsquo;t agree with what I wrote over the years, I hope you appreciated the effort. There are lots of great reporters at the Free Press, and I&rsquo;ll continue to read them each morning &mdash; while drinking multiple cups of coffee.

I've thought a lot over the past week about the joy I felt the first time I walked into the old Free Press building at 321 W. Lafayette. That was in 1991, during my senior year at Detroit Southwestern. The school paper was produced by the Free Press back in those days. My English teacher, Joellen Gilchrist, who said my potential as a writer far exceeded my grade point average, convinced me to go down to the newspaper offices and help edit the school paper.

Feeling the buzz of reporters talking about their stories, and watching them work to get the paper out, made me realize I wanted to write for the rest of my life.

I got a job working on the sports department's prep crew a couple years later while taking classes at Wayne State University. In 1995, before finishing college, I was hired full-time as a sports agate editor. Eventually, I was promoted to reporter.

Here are a few of my favorite memories from my time writing for the Freep.

I've laughed in recent years as some coaches have become increasingly combative as they answer questions about depth charts, injuries and decisions they made that affected the outcome of games.

I've often thought about the time I spent around Mouse Davis, who coached the Detroit Fury of the Arena Football League at the Palace of Auburn Hills in 2001-02.

When I mentioned one day that I didn&rsquo;t understand all of the terminology I was overhearing at a practice, he told me he&rsquo;d give me a playbook the next time he cut a player. I thought he was joking.

A week later, he handed me a black binder full of diagrams. The only thing he asked is that I not show it to anyone else.

A former coach cautioned me when I began covering college hockey that Michigan&rsquo;s Red Berenson could be gruff and intimidating. Other coaches, I was told, would be easier to deal with because they'd love attention for their programs.

But I found Berenson to be one of the smartest, most genuine people I&rsquo;ve ever met in sports. I always knew he was up for talking about any topic, not just hockey.

He dealt with retirement rumors for several seasons before finally stepping down in 2017.

I surprised U-M staff when I showed up one day &mdash; with rumors swirling around Ann Arbor that a retirement announcement was looming. I noticed players filing into Yost Ice Arena, and then athletic director Warde Manuel. I was the only reporter there to talk to Berenson minutes after the team was told of his retirement. I broke the news on social media and had a story, with quotes from Berenson, posted before he held a formal news conference later that day.

Two of my favorite assignments involved Detroit native Jerome (Bus) Bettis. I assisted with coverage of Super Bowl XL and wrote a sidebar about Bettis retiring after the Steelers&rsquo; 21-10 win over the Seattle Seahawks in 2006.

A year earlier, I&rsquo;d gone to Pittsburgh to ask Bettis about retirement rumors. He beamed with pride as he told teammates a reporter from his hometown had come to interview him. After being told by the PR staff that I&rsquo;d only get a few minutes with him, Bettis assured me I&rsquo;d get all the time I needed.

Darren McCarty, one of Detroit's most beloved athletes, didn't talk to me for the rest of the 2008 season after I wrote about the Dear John letter he left for his wife in Calgary and $20,000 he racked up in debt on a credit card that was in her name.

He went on to help the Red Wings win another Stanley Cup, his fourth. He eventually wrote a book and opened up about some of the mistakes he made.

I've had some great conversations with him since. And I've written a few more stories

He may not have liked what I wrote in 2008, but I'd like to think he respected that I was doing my job.
