---
HEADLINE: Detroit Tigers' Victor Martinez was a friendly face for a young reporter
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2018-09-22
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2018/09/22/detroit-victor-martinez-retires-detroit-tigers/1400009002/
---

The day I first met Victor Martinez, I forgot what I wanted to say.

It was four years ago, inside the cramped home clubhouse at Joker Marchant Stadium, and I was there as a pinch-hitting baseball reporter to cover spring training for a week.

On my first day in Lakeland, Fla., I drove from the Residence Inn to Joker Marchant Stadium twice, just to make sure I knew the way. The clubhouse opened at 8 a.m. the next morning and I set my alarm for 6:30. It didn&rsquo;t matter; I couldn&rsquo;t sleep.

That morning, I followed other reporters to scrums, awkwardly tried to avoid running into players and almost talked to my favorite player. I had no idea what I was doing.

It was that morning when I saw Martinez fiddling with his catcher&rsquo;s gear. The bulk of Martinez&rsquo;s days behind the plate were in the rearview, but he was still a catcher at heart, his locker stationed next to the other catchers.

He carried an air of intimidation. He was what one reporter called an ATM &mdash; only of use when you need him. So, in search of a story to try and impress my boss, I mustered up the nerve to ask Martinez if I could talk to him about catching.

It went fine until I forgot the first question I wanted to ask. Standing there, completely blanked out, I said as much.

Torii Hunter was sitting to his right.

&ldquo;You hear this, T?&rdquo; Martinez said. &ldquo;He is minor league.&rdquo;

He did not say it dismissively, rather endearingly, and as Hunter laughed, I blurted out a few questions, got my quotes, wrote my story and began my first true relationship inside the Tigers clubhouse.

The next day, he saw me and said, &ldquo;Hey, Minor League.&rdquo; I was in, wearing that name as a badge of pride.

I reflected on all these memories on Saturday, when Martinez stepped to the plate at Comerica Park for the final time in his career. He hit an in-field single, then retired as one of the better designated hitters of the past decade.

I would pinch-hit occasionally throughout that season, Martinez&rsquo;s best, when he hit .335 with 32 home runs and 42 strikeouts and finished runner-up for the American League Most Valuable Player Award. Every time, I would enter the Tigers clubhouse and make a quick right toward Martinez&rsquo;s locker, where I would ask him bad questions and he&rsquo;d give me brief answers.

Sometimes, though, he would open up his beautiful hitting mind. About how eye contact with the pitcher was important. About how two balls and two strikes was his favorite count to hit in because the pitcher wanted to throw their best pitch, in order to avoid going to a full count. Mostly, though, it was &ldquo;Hello, Victor,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Minor League,&rdquo; until one day, when I asked him to introduce me to his son, Victor Jose.

That day, he asked what I wanted him to introduce me as. I said I didn&rsquo;t care.

&ldquo;This is Anthony,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And he&rsquo;s going to be a good baseball reporter one day.&rdquo;

It was that day &mdash; still chained to the desk, unsure if I would ever get a chance to cover baseball for a living &mdash; that I first felt like a major leaguer.

As the season went on, I decided to write a story on Martinez&rsquo;s upbringing. His dad died of a heart attack when he was younger and arrived in the United States at 16 years old, speaking no English, taken in by a host family in Ohio.

Martinez made me work for the story. If I was a minute late to the clubhouse, he wouldn&rsquo;t have time, telling me to get there on time. If I was wrong about a fact, he would tell me to prepare better.

Helping out in Cleveland one night, I reached the Bixlers on their house phone and drove out to their house in Warren, Ohio, after the game. When I got there, Patti had food on the table for me and we sat and talked for more than an hour. They were as welcoming as anyone could be to a stranger &mdash; they had taken in many baseball players over the years, along with having children of their own &mdash; and shared a side of Martinez that couldn&rsquo;t be seen through his intense at-bats.

The next season was my first on the Tigers beat and every time I was in Cleveland or they were in Detroit, I would make a point to say hello.

After the final game of the season in Chicago, I remember trying to find Martinez, who was sick that day, to say thank you for all of the help that season. For his locker space being somewhat of a safe haven, a place I would almost instinctively head to when the clubhouse opened. He was nowhere to be seen, so I told Victor Jose to tell his dad I said thanks.

The next season, after many requests, he finally relented and introduced me to Salvador Perez, the Royals catcher who grew up idolizing him in Venezuela.

The respect that Martinez carries around baseball is immense. He is as prideful as they come. Betray his trust, and it won&rsquo;t be granted any longer.

On Saturday afternoon, before the final game of Martinez&rsquo; career, I talked with Perez about Martinez.

&ldquo;What a great day for Victor,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Happy and sad.&rdquo;

For about a year, he remembered me as the reporter from Detroit who Martinez introduced him to.

Martinez and I haven&rsquo;t talked much this season, but there is still a week left. And if I do get the chance to talk to him, I will not forget what to say. I will thank Victor Martinez for making me feel like I could be a good baseball reporter one day.
