---
HEADLINE: Justin Verlander apologizes to Tigers for saying he was misdiagnosed
BYLINE: Anthony Fenech
DATE: 2018-08-10
URL: https://www.freep.com/story/sports/mlb/tigers/2018/08/10/detroit-tigers-justin-verlander-apology/963264002/
---

Justin Verlander has apologized to the Detroit Tigers.

According to a Tigers spokesperson, Verlander reached out to general manager Al Avila and senior director of medical services Kevin Rand immediately afterwards, apologizing for the comments. The nature of the apology was centered around his use of the word &ldquo;misdiagnose.&rdquo;

Verlander was unable to be reached for comment.

Speaking about the injury &mdash; and a subsequent lat injury which sidelined him for much of the first half that season, Verlander said, &ldquo;I knew something was wrong. They take me out and misdiagnose me. &mldr; Didn&rsquo;t get an MRI. Because it was so mild.&rdquo;

Through a team spokesperson, the Tigers did not comment directly on Verlander&rsquo;s claim, or the nature of his apologies, but provided details of his injury rehabilitation process, which refute his claim.

According to the Tigers, Verlander received two MRI scans late in spring training, which confirmed the diagnosis of a right triceps strain. One month later, Verlander met with renowned orthopedic surgeon Anthony Romeo in Chicago, who found a tear of the right lat.

Verlander returned from the injury in mid-June and posted a 3.38 ERA in 20 starts. After finishing second in AL Cy Young Award voting in 2016, Verlander was traded to the Astros for three prospects Aug. 30. This season, his performance has rivaled that of his best seasons: In 25 starts with Houston, he is 11-7 with a 2.50 ERA and 0.909 WHIP, and is striking out 11.7 batters per nine innings, which would be a career-high.

In so many words, the Tigers defended their treatment of Verlander, who received a seven-year, $180 million contract extension in the spring of 2013.

With Verlander drawing a yearly salary of $28 million, his health was likely high on the team&rsquo;s list of priorities. The disabled list stint in 2015 was the only DL visit of his career.

The story focused on Verlander&rsquo;s physical and mental challenges of bouncing back from injuries. In it, he says he was &ldquo;depressed&rdquo; over his physical failings, fearful his career was over and strongly suggested that Upton&rsquo;s presence saved his life.

In the story, Verlander credited Annie Gow, a physical therapist based in New York City, with discovering his true diagnosis and getting him back up to peak performance by improving his flexibility.

According to a team spokesperson, Gow was present at the team&rsquo;s spring training facilities in Lakeland, Florida, in 2015.

Avila did not become the Tigers' general manager until Aug. 4, 2015.

Verlander struggled mightily in 2014, by his standards, while recovering from core muscle surgery the previous off-season. Over his next three seasons with the Tigers &mdash; while playing under the watchful eye of Rand, who was promoted to a new position this offseason &mdash; he regained velocity on his fastball and his status as one of baseball&rsquo;s best pitchers.
